<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<?xml-model href="./dates_and_times_in_DH.rng" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://relaxng.org/ns/structure/1.0"?>
<?xml-model href="./dates_and_times_in_DH.isosch" type="application/xml" schematypens="http://purl.oclc.org/dsdl/schematron"?>
<!-- $Id: dates_and_times_in_DH.tei 3848 2025-12-26 14:12:39Z syd $ -->
<TEI xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0" xml:lang="en"
     xmlns:w="http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/ns/internal_documentation/1.0">
  <?README

    This document uses a customization of TEI which is mostly a small
    subset thereof (but which is *not* a subset of TEI Lite — for details
    see <tagUsage> or the affiliated ODD file), with two extensions:
    * The <sponsor> element is an allowed child of <docImprint>, and
    * two new elements occur.
    
    The <sponsor> is allowed in <docImprint> because I want to give
    the sponsoring organization (DSG) credit in the frontmatter of the
    output HTML, and using the TEI Stylesheets it is easier to do that
    using <titlePage> than from the TEI header (which I find weird,
    personally).

    The two new elements are in the WWP internal documentation
    namespace and have local names "fix" and "var". <w:fix> and
    <w:var> are phrase-level elements that exist for the sole purpose
    of visually diffentiating FIXed portions of temporal expressions
    (that are always the same regardless of what date & time the
    expression represents) from the VARiable portions that are filled
    in with digits to specify the date & time desired. So, for
    example, using this system the generic URL for any version of the
    TEI Guidelines might be encoded as
    <code>
      <w:fix>https://www.tei-c.org/Vault/P5/</w:fix>
      <w:var>MAJOR</w:var>
      <w:fix>.</w:fix>
      <w:var>MINOR</w:var>
      <w:fix>.</w:fix>
      <w:var>PATCH</w:var>
      <w:fix>/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/</w:fix>
    </code>, except with no whitespace.
    Because of these differences, we cannot just use the standard TEI
    Stylesheets to generate output. However, since the non-TEI
    elements exist for no reason other than rendering the output
    differently, they could instead be expressed as standard TEI <hi>
    elements with an appropriatea @rend, @rendition, or @style. (In
    formal TEI, this information should be represented in the ODD that
    defines this language using the <equiv> element.)

    It would be quite reasonable to create a driver XSLT file for the
    TEI Stylesheets that handled the <w:fix> and <w:var> elements
    (which is what I do to generate HTML for the web¹) or to create an
    XSLT pre-processing step that converted those elements to <hi>
    elements before generating output using systems intended for
    TEI. But in fact, because these names are not similar to any TEI
    names and because these elements never have attributes, it is
    quite trivial to convert them to TEI <hi> elements with a simple
    Perl one-liner:
    $ perl -pe 's,<w:var>,<hi style="color:green;">,g; s,<w:fix>,<hi style="color:red;">,g; s,</w:(var|fix)>,</hi>,g;' dates_and_times_in_DH.tei > /tmp/dates_and_times_in_DH.tei
    That command reads in the source from the current directory and
    writes out the converted form to the /tmp/ directory.
    
    This process has the disadvantage that occurences of the strings
    “<w:fix>”, “<w:var>”, “</w:fix>”, and “</w:var>” that are not tags
    (i.e., are in comments, CDATA marked sections, or processing
    instructions like this one) are also converted. But it is easy to
    use and blazingly fast. (The execution of that command takes less
    than ½ of ⅒ of 1 second on a Raspberry Pi.) So it is what I do
    when generating output for proofreading.

    note
    ----
    ¹ The commandline I currently use is:
    $ saxon -xsl:./dates_and_times_in_DH.xslt -s:./dates_and_times_in_DH.tei -o:./dates_and_times_in_DH.xhtml cssInlineFiles=$(pwd)/dates_and_times_in_DH.css numberBackFigures=true showTitleAuthor=true generationComment=true verbose=true footnoteBackLink=true "?wwp=true()"
    or with final parameter set to false().

    previous notes-to-self
    -------- -------------
      $ ( cd /tmp/; ~/Documents/Stylesheets/bin/teitohtml dates_and_times_in_DH.tei )
      And then, if you don’t have your TEI converter CSS stuff set up properly,
      $ xmlstarlet ed -P -L -N h=http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml -i "/h:html/h:body" -t attr -n style -v "padding: 3em;" /tmp/dates_and_times_in_DH.html
      to make up for that. Then
      $ firefox /tmp/dates_and_times_in_DH.html
      will do the trick!
      *********
      I currently use the following:
      $ time ( perl -pe 's,<w:var>,<hi style="color:green;">,g; s,<w:fix>,<hi style="color:red;">,g; s,</w:(var|fix)>,</hi>,g;' ~/Documents/DSG/dates_and_times_in_DH.tei > /tmp/dates_and_times_in_DH.tei ; ~/Documents/Stylesheets/bin/teitohtml --localsource=/home/syd/Documents/TEI_gitHub/P5/p5subset.xml /tmp/dates_and_times_in_DH.tei ; xmlstarlet ed -P -N h=http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml -i "/h:html/h:body" -t attr -n style -v "padding: 3em; font-size: 100%;" /tmp/dates_and_times_in_DH.html > ~/Desktop/dates_and_times_in_DH.xhtml ; xmllint --format ~/Desktop/dates_and_times_in_DH.xhtml | egrep -v '<!DOCTYPE html>' > /tmp/dates_and_times_in_DH.html ) ; firefox ~/Desktop/dates_and_times_in_DH.xhtml
      This creates both .xhtml and .html outputs. The .xhtml version
      is for loading into a browser and reading; the .html version is
      for human inspection — it is easier for a human to read because
      it has whitespace and indention, but the introduction thereof
      causes incorrect whitespace to be introduced to some formulas
      which render them incorrect in a browser. So you need to use the
      .xhtml for viewing in the browser, the .html version when you
      want to inspect the HTML. The .xhtml version is places in my
      ~/Desktop/ directory because Firefox will no longer open a file
      from /tmp/. ARGH!
  ?>
  <teiHeader>
    <fileDesc>
      <titleStmt>
        <title>Dates and Times in DH</title>
        <title>An annotated application profile of ISO 8601:2019 for
          use with <choice><abbr>TEI</abbr><expan>the Text Encoding Initiative</expan></choice>
          and other
          <choice><abbr>DH</abbr><expan>Digital Humanities</expan></choice> systems</title>
        <author xml:id="sbauman.emt">
          <name>Syd Bauman</name>
        </author>
        <respStmt xml:id="sconnell.yuw">
          <resp>Review and copy editing</resp>
          <name>Sarah Connell</name>
        </respStmt>
        <respStmt xml:id="cear02">
          <resp>Review and copy editing</resp>
          <name>Caitlin Pollock</name>
        </respStmt>
        <respStmt xml:id="cear03">
          <resp>Review and copy editing</resp>
          <name>Karin Bredenberg</name>
        </respStmt>
        <respStmt xml:id="aclark.ash">
          <resp>accessility and readability improvements</resp>
          <name>Ash Clark</name>
        </respStmt>
        <sponsor>Northeastern University Digital Scholarship Group</sponsor>
      </titleStmt>
      <editionStmt>
        <edition>version 1.0.0</edition>
        <!-- Must match /TEI/text/front/titlePage/docEdition. -->
      </editionStmt>
      <publicationStmt>
        <publisher>Northeastern University Digital Scholarship Group</publisher>
        <distributor>Northeastern University Women Writers Project</distributor>
        <availability>
          <licence target="https://mit-license.org/">MIT License</licence>
          <p>Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any
          person obtaining a copy of this software and associated
          documentation files (the “Software”), to deal in the
          Software without restriction, including without limitation
          the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish, distribute,
          sublicense, or sell copies of the Software, and to permit
          persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject
          to the following conditions:</p>
          <p>The above copyright notice and this permission notice
          shall be included in all copies or substantial portions of
          the Software.</p>
          <p>THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED “AS IS”, WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY
          KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE
          WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
          PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS
          OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY CLAIM, DAMAGES OR
          OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT, TORT OR
          OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
          SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.</p>
        </availability>
      </publicationStmt>
      <sourceDesc>
        <p>Born digital</p>
      </sourceDesc>
    </fileDesc>
    <encodingDesc>
      <appInfo>
        <application ident="replace_tagsDecl" version="1.0.0" when="2025-12-27T00:41:44Z" source="file:/home/syd/Documents/wwp-public-code-share/tagsDecl/replace_tagsDecl.xslt">
          <label>tagsDecl creation</label>
          <p>The tagging declaration(s) herein were generated by this
          program, the canonical source of which is on <ref
          target="https://github.com/NEU-DSG/wwp-public-code-share/blob/main/tagsDecl/replace_tagsDecl.xslt">gitHub</ref>.</p>
        </application>
      </appInfo>
      <schemaRef url="./dates_and_times_in_DH.odd"/>
      <p>Written (or at least, my intention is for this to be written)
      in a way that makes conversion to simple HTML or Markdown easy
      to do.</p>
      <p><label>WARNING:</label> In several cases tags of elements
      that are descendants of an <gi>egXML</gi> are either immediately
      preceded by or followed by a ZERO WIDTH SPACE (U+200B). This
      character is invisible to the reader for two reasons: it has no
      width, and even if it did it is a space. So you cannot easily
      tell that these characters are there. They are there to force
      the parser to consider some elements that would otherwise be
      considered element-only content to be mixed content, so the
      whitespace is not thrown away. The processing I like to use
      requires the whitespace, so this hack works around that
      problem. But it does mean you should not copy-and-paste directly
      from an example, at least not without deleting occurences of
      U+200B.</p>
      <p>Note that, in general, XML examples are enclosed in an
      <gi>egXML</gi> that is itself inside a <gi>figure</gi>. This is
      not actually a requirement, but if the <gi>egXML</gi> falls
      somewhere such that an XML parser would consider the whitespace
      immediately before and after ignorable (e.g., if it were between
      paragraphs) my current method of processing it would fail.</p>
      <p>Discussions of formal representations in running prose make
      use of two new elements, <gi>w:fix</gi> and <gi>w:var</gi> for
      representing portions that are static and portions that are
      replaced with the desired values, respectively.</p>
      <!-- p>Blocks of formal representations are encoded in an
      <gi>ab</gi> with a <att>type</att> of <val>fdb</val> (for formal
      data block). Actual snippets of iXML and W3C-flavored regular
      expressions are encoded using <gi>code</gi> elements with a
      <att>lang</att> attribute of either <val>ixml</val> or
      <val>regex</val>.</p -->
      <tagsDecl partial="false" n="for_the_first_and_only_text_element">
        <namespace name="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/1.0">
          <tagUsage gi="item"        occurs="161" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="p"           occurs="068" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="val"         occurs="066" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="q"           occurs="039" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="label"       occurs="032" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="head"        occurs="030" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="div"         occurs="028" withId="004"/>
          <tagUsage gi="mentioned"   occurs="022" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="note"        occurs="015" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="emph"        occurs="012" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="list"        occurs="011" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="hi"          occurs="010" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="ref"         occurs="009" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="title"       occurs="008" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="soCalled"    occurs="007" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="figure"      occurs="006" withId="006"/>
          <tagUsage gi="code"        occurs="005" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="quote"       occurs="005" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="lb"          occurs="004" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="name"        occurs="004" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="att"         occurs="003" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="term"        occurs="003" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="ptr"         occurs="002" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="gi"          occurs="002" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="front"       occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="titlePage"   occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="docAuthor"   occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="docEdition"  occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="docTitle"    occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="titlePart"   occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="docImprint"  occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="sponsor"     occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="docDate"     occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="date"        occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="divGen"      occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="body"        occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="foreign"     occurs="001" withId="000"/>
        </namespace>
        <namespace name="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples">
          <tagUsage gi="egXML"     occurs="007" withId="007"/>
          <tagUsage gi="date"      occurs="007" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="p"         occurs="003" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="sp"        occurs="002" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="speaker"   occurs="002" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="ab"        occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="lb"        occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="div"       occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="head"      occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="byline"    occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="persName"  occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="dateline"  occurs="001" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="time"      occurs="001" withId="000"/>
        </namespace>
        <namespace name="http://www.wwp.northeastern.edu/ns/internal_documentation/1.0">
          <tagUsage gi="var"  occurs="542" withId="000"/>
          <tagUsage gi="fix"  occurs="495" withId="000"/>
        </namespace>
      </tagsDecl>
    </encodingDesc>
    <revisionDesc>
      <!-- In chronological order, because that is more fun. -->
      <change when-iso="2020-27" who="#sbauman.emt">Conceived</change>
      <change when-iso="2020-12" who="#sbauman.emt">First attempt thwarted (I forget why)</change>
      <change when-iso="2021-12" who="#sbauman.emt">Second attempt thwarted (by illness)</change>
      <change when-iso="2022-12-25" who="#sbauman.emt">Started</change>
      <change when-iso="2022-12-26/2023-01-09" who="#sbauman.emt">Initial rush of work</change>
      <change when-iso="{2023-01-29,2023-10-18,2023-10-20}" who="#sbauman.emt">Various tweaks &amp; additions</change>
      <change when-iso="2023-12-23/2024-01-02">Second rush of work</change>
      <change when-iso="2024-09-17" who="#sbauman.emt">Add “other calendars” subsection; various minor fixes</change>
      <change when-iso="2024-12-22/2025-01-07" who="#sbauman.emt">Third rush of work</change>
      <change when-iso="2025-08-25" who="#sbauman.emt">Impliment
      suggestions by <name ref="#sconnell.yuw">Sarah Connell</name>. Of the 13
      PIs she inserted:
      <list>
        <item>8 accepted</item>
        <item>2 were just comments, no action required</item>
        <item>1 accepted with tweak</item>
        <item>1 accepted for now</item>
        <item>1 rejected</item>
      </list>
      Which is to say she is a very good proofreader.
      </change>
      <change when-iso="2025-09-02" who="#sbauman.emt">Added corrections from <name>Karin Bredenberg</name>.</change>
      <change when-iso="2025-10-21" who="#sbauman.emt">Some alterations based the suggestions of <name>Caitlin Pollock</name>.</change>
      <change when-iso="2025-12-06" who="#sbauman.emt">Replaced
      sprawling header comment with a mildly improved README
      processing instruction; added <gi>tagsDecl</gi> (which was
      generated with modified versions of generate_tagsDecl.xslt,
      pretty_tagUsage.xslt, and pretty_tagUsage.perl, then reversing
      the order of lines in each <gi>namespace</gi> with M-x
      reverse-region :-).</change>
      <change when-iso="2025-12-17" who="#sbauman.emt">
        Among other things, added ZERO WIDTH SPACE (U+200B)
        characters immediately before &lt; characters in some examples
        to force XML parser to recognize I want the whitespace in
        between tags.</change>
      <change when-iso="2025-12-19" who="#sbauman.emt">
        <list>
          <item>Added frontmatter</item>
          <item>Commented out formal data blocks and prose discussions about them</item>
          <item>Added an exmple of a date &amp; time in explicit form right at begining of chap 3</item>
          <item>Changed all basic symbols in list of explicit form symbols to FIXed (what was I thinking?)</item>
          <item>Commented out entire backmatter (which had only 1 appendix, Norm’s iXML grammar for ISO 8601:2004).</item>
        </list>
      </change>
    </revisionDesc>
  </teiHeader>
  <text>
    <front>
      <titlePage>
        <docAuthor>Syd Bauman</docAuthor>
        <docTitle>
          <titlePart>
            <title type="main">Dates and Times in DH</title>
            <lb rend="show"/>
            <title type="sub">
              An annotated application profile
              <lb rend="show"/>
              of ISO 8601:2019
              <lb rend="show"/>
              for use with TEI
              <lb rend="show"/>
              and other DH systems
            </title>
          </titlePart>
        </docTitle>
        <docEdition>version 1.0.0</docEdition>
        <!-- Above should match /TEI/teiHeader/fileDesc/editionStmt/edition. -->
        <docImprint>
          <sponsor>Northeastern University Digital Scholarship Group</sponsor>
          <!-- Not bothering to say it is (currently) published by WWP
               because it is on their website, it is implied -->
          <!-- publisher>Northeastern University Women Writers Project</publisher -->
        </docImprint>
        <docDate>
          <date when="2025-12-26">2025-12-26</date>
        </docDate>
      </titlePage>
      <divGen type="toc"/>
      <div type="section">
        <head>Acknowledgements</head>
        <p>Funding for this project was provided by the <ref
        target="https://library.northeastern.edu/">Northeastern
        University Library</ref>’s <ref
        target="https://dsg.northeastern.edu/">Digital Scholarship
        Group</ref>. The author is particularly indebted to Patrick
        Yott for his vision; to Sarah Connell, Caitlin Pollock,
        and Karin Bredenberg for review and copy editing; and to Ash
        Clark for making the result more visually appealing and
        more accessible.</p>
      </div>
    </front>
    <body>
      <div type="chapter">
        <head>Introduction</head>
        <p>If you were to write today’s date, you might write “Sun 25
        Dec 22”, or “12/25/22”, or “25/12/22”, or “Christmas, 2022”,
        or any one of dozens of other formats. But if you want a)
        unambiguous understanding of the date by future readers, and
        b) your current computer to understand it, you would write
        “2022-12-25”. In fact, if you were writing this date on the
        <ref
        target="https://tei-c.org/release/doc/tei-p5-doc/en/html/ref-att.datable.w3c.html#tei_att.when"><att>when</att>
        attribute of a TEI element</ref>, you would be
        <emph>required</emph> to use that format. Besides being
        unambiguous<note place="foot">This format is unambiguous
        because we, modern human society, have agreed through our 
        national standards bodies and the International Standards
        Organization that the order is year, month, day. Without that
        agreement <q>1797-03-04</q> is ambiguous: it might indicate 04
        March 1797 <!-- George Washington peacefully reqliquinshes his
        role as 1st President of the United States to John Adams,
        ushering in a 223¾-year span of peaceful transfer of power in
        the USA --> or it might indicate 03 April 1797<!-- In a letter
        to James McHenry, George Washington writes “We get so many details in the
        Gazettes, and of such different complexions, that it is
        impossible to know what credence to give to any of them.”
        —https://founders.archives.gov/documents/Washington/06-01-02-0051#GEWN-06-01-02-0051-fn-0001
        -->.</note> and
        understandable by your computer, dates in this format are also
        easily sorted, since their components are in <soCalled>big
        endian</soCalled> order.<note place="foot">See, for example,
        <ref
        target="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Calendar_date#Gregorian,_year%E2%80%93month%E2%80%93day_(YMD)">Wikipedia’s
        description of the advantages of this order</ref>.</note></p>
        <p>The standard that defines this format of a 4-digit year
        followed by a hyphen (U+002D) followed by a 2-digit month
        (01–12) followed by a hyphen followed by a 2-digit day number
        (01–31) is <ref
        target="https://www.w3.org/TR/xmlschema-2/#date">XML Schema
        Part 2: Datatypes, section 3.2.9</ref> (but see also <ref
        target="https://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-datetime">Date and Time
        Formats</ref>, also published by the W3C). That standard, in
        turn, was based on the more comprehensive, and more
        complicated, ISO 8601:1988(E) <title>Data elements and
        interchange formats - Information interchange - Representation
        of dates and times</title> published by the <name
        xml:lang="fr">Organisation internationale de
        normalisation</name> or <name>ISO</name>. This standard has
        since been updated and revised into the far more
        comprehensive, and far more complicated, ISO 8601:2019
        <title>Date and time — Representations for information
        interchange ISO 8601:2019</title>, also published by the
        ISO.<note place="foot">To be more precisely correct, the
        standard is published as two separate parts, ISO 8601-1:2019
        <title>Date and time — Representations for information
        interchange — Part 1: Basic rules</title> and ISO 8601-2:2019
        <title>Date and time — Representations for information
        interchange — Part 2: Extensions</title>.</note></p>
        <p>The purpose of this document is to give readers information
        and guidance on how to write dates, times, intervals, and
        durations, along with any inherent imprecision or uncertainty,
        such that the representation conforms to ISO 8601:2019, and
        thus can be used on the TEI <att>when-iso</att> attribute.
        This document is <emph>not</emph> intended to be an
        exhaustive tutorial on ISO 8601:2019, although in large part
        it could serve as such for many of the features of the
        standard.</p>
        <!-- p>An iXML grammar and a W3C regular expression is provided
        for most portions of ISO 8601:2019 explicitly covered by this
        document. Note, however, that the regular expressions herein
        occasionally use whitespace to improve readability — in all
        cases the expectation is that the regular expression will be
        used with the <ref
        target="https://www.w3.org/TR/xpath-functions-30/#flags"><code>x</code>
        flag</ref>, or all whitespace will be removed before the
        regular expression is used. Furthermore, as W3C regular
        expressions are by default anchored, the regular expressions
        herein are not. Thus applications may need to anchor them
        (e.g. with <code>^</code> at the beginning and <code>$</code>
        at the end, or with <code>\W</code> at either end) before
        use.</p -->
        <div type="section" xml:id="profile">
          <head>Profile<note place="foot">This profile is very similar
          to the <ref
          target="https://www.loc.gov/standards/datetime/">EDTF level
          2</ref> profile specified in Appendix A of ISO
          8601:2019-2.</note></head>
          <p>Whenever there is a choice between an “extended”,
          i.e. delimited, format (e.g. <val>2022-12-25</val>) and a
          “basic”, i.e. undelimited, format
          (e.g. <val>20221225</val>), this document <emph>only</emph>
          considers the extended format. This document simply ignores
          the existence of the undelimited versions; they are not
          mentioned any further in the prose nor exemplified
          anywhere. (And they will not be represented in the regular
          expressions or iXML grammars that will hopefully someday
          accompany this document.)</p>
          <p>Furthermore, this document presumes that in all cases
          users wish to express dates with 4-digit years. ISO 8601
          permits an <soCalled>expanded representation</soCalled> in
          which a year may be indicated by more than 4 digits. It also
          permits a year to be indicated exponentially. The ability to
          record dates prior to 10,000 BCE is clearly useful in some
          fields (e.g., geology); <foreign>homo sapiens</foreign> has
          been around for a period that would require 6 digits to
          <!-- H. Sapiens emerged ~325,000 years ago, per Wikipedia. -->
          represent, and the dates of the earliest cave drawings would
          <!-- Cave painting of a pig dated at 45,500 years ago, per Wikipedia -->
          require 5 digits to represent. However, humanist endeavors
          are generally more restricted in scope. Since this profile
          of ISO 8601:2019 is intended in large part for use with the
          Text Encoding Initiative, and the earliest known writing of
          any kind (let alone that which could be called
          <mentioned>text</mentioned><!-- The Kish Tablet,
          -3200~Y. -->) can easily be represented in 4 digits,<note
          place="foot">And it is basically inconceivable that human
          civilization as we know it, let alone computer text
          encoding, will exist 7,975 years from now. Heck, I would be
          surprised if it lasted 79.75 years.</note> we limit 
          ourselves to 4-digit years in the implicit formats, and do
          not consider exponential years even in the explicit
          formats. I.e., the entirety of ISO 8601:2019-2 §&#x202F;4.7
          is ignored.</p>
          <p>Similarly, this document does not entertain the
          possibilities of expressing large numbers in exponential
          form, or of specifying the number of significant digits of a
          numeric value. (§&#x202F;4.4.2 and §&#x202F;4.4.3,
          respectively.)</p>
          <p>In this profile, the existence of leap seconds is
          ignored. In reality the <name type="org"
          xml:lang="fr">Bureau international des poids et
          mesures</name> may declare for any given year that the last
          minute of the year has either 59 or 61 seconds, rather than
          the usual 60. Thus ISO 8601:2019 has the capability to
          represent a minute as having up to 61 seconds. While it
          would make sense to develop validators (e.g., regular
          expressions or iXML grammar fragments) that allow the last
          minute of a given year to have 59, 60, or 61 seconds, the
          assumption here is that this is an extraordinarily rare
          requirement in DH, and thus not worth the immediate effort
          or added complexity.</p>
          <p>The expression of grouped time scale units (§&#x202F;5) and
          selection rules (§&#x202F;12) are also ignored by this
          profile. While such capabilities may be of occasional use
          in DH, including them in this document would delay its
          publication by months, if not years.</p>
          <p>This profile does <emph>not</emph> take ISO
          8601-1:2019/Amd 1:2022 into account, both because I do not 
          have a copy of it, and because the major change it makes
          (per <ref
          target="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601#History">Wikipedia</ref>)
          is to permit <q>24:00:00</q> as a representation of
          <soCalled>midnight at the end of a calendar day</soCalled>,
          which should not be, and should never have been,
          allowed.</p>
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Internal format</head>
          <p>In this document references to <q>ISO 8601</q> without
          qualification are references to any version of the standard
          or all versions. References to <q>ISO 8601:2019</q> without
          a part number are references to the two parts combined.</p>
          <p>When written in this document, the portions of a
          representation that are placeholders for the actual values
          in an expression appear <w:var>in blue</w:var> and
          portions that are static appear <w:fix>in red</w:fix>.
          E.g., the general format for a date &amp; time (without a
          time shift representation) is
          <w:fix>⊖</w:fix><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var>.
          (As you might guess, the actual formatting is not determined
          by the author of this document, but rather by the
          stylesheets applied to it.)
          <list type="gloss">
            <head>glossary</head>
            <label>⊖ <hi style="font-weight: normal;">(U+2296)</hi></label>
            <item>an optional minus sign (U+002D).<note place="foot">Thus
            this is the <q>two dee or not two dee</q> sign.&#x263A;</note></item>
            <label>± <hi style="font-weight: normal;">(U+00B1)</hi></label>
            <item>either a plus sign (U+002B) or a minus sign (U+002D)</item>
            <label>YYYY</label>
            <item>a four-digit year</item>
            <label>MM</label>
            <item>a two-digit month (01–12)</item>
            <label>DD</label>
            <item>a two-digit day of month (01–31)</item>
            <label>hh</label>
            <item>a two-digit hour (00–23)</item>
            <label>mm</label>
            <item>a two-digit minute (00–59)</item>
            <label>ss</label>
            <item>a two-digit second (00–59)<note
            place="foot">Reminder, in rare circumstances a <q>60</q>
            may be necessary, but these cases are not covered by this
            profile.</note></item>
            <label>OOO</label>
            <item>a three-digit day of the year (001–366)</item>
            <label>ⓠ <hi style="font-weight: normal;">(U+24E0)</hi></label>
            <item>a <term>qualification character</term>: one of <w:fix>?</w:fix> (uncertain), <w:fix>~</w:fix> (approximate), or <w:fix>%</w:fix> (both uncertain and approximate).</item>
            <label>ⓓ <hi style="font-weight: normal;">(U+24D3)</hi></label>
            <item>either a period (U+002E) or a comma (U+002C) used as
            a decimal sign to separate the whole part from the decimal
            fractional part of a number</item>
            <label>a terminal character with an overbar or macron —
            see following entries</label>
            <item>one or more digits used as a decimal fraction</item>
            <label>ⓓs̄ <hi style="font-weight: normal;">(U+0073, U+0304)</hi></label>
            <item>a fractional number of seconds (commonly used in the sciences, rarely needed in DH)</item>
            <label>ⓓm̄ <hi style="font-weight: normal;">(U+006D, U+0304)</hi></label>
            <item>a fractional number of minutes (rarely used)</item>
            <label>ⓓh̄ <hi style="font-weight: normal;">(U+0068, U+0304)</hi></label>
            <item>a fractional number of hours (rarely used)<note
            place="foot">Although I personally keep track of billable
            hours to the tenth of an hour, not the ¼ hour, which has
            made me an annoyance to my manager and very good at
            multiples of 6.</note></item>
            <label>ⓓD̄ <hi style="font-weight: normal;">(U+0044, U+0304)</hi></label>
            <item>a fractional number of days (rarely used)</item>
            <label>ⓓM̄ <hi style="font-weight: normal;">(U+004D, U+0304)</hi></label>
            <item>a fractional number of months (imprecise and rarely used)</item>
            <!--
                Imprecise because a month may have 28, 29, 30, or 31
                days. Personally I would like it if we defined “month”
                in situations like this as 1 Julian year / 12, or
                2,629,800 s.

                But some might argue that we should instead be using
                the anomalistic year (how long to get from closest
                point to sun back to closest point to sun) which is
                365.259636 days, the tropical year (spring equinox to
                spring equinox) which is 365.24219 days, or the
                sidereal year (from the perspective of the stars, and
                thus what astronomers and NASA use) which is
                365.256363004 days. See
                https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Year and
                https://www.public.asu.edu/~mjwhite/Sidereal%20and%20tropical%20years.pdf.
            -->
            <label>ⓓȲ <hi style="font-weight: normal;">(U+0059, U+0304)</hi></label>
            <item>a fractional number of years (imprecise and rarely used)</item>
            <!--
                Imprecise because a year may have 365 or 366 days. So
                not *very* imprecise. Personally I would like it if we
                defined “year” in situations like this as a Julian
                year, i.e. 365.25 days or 31,557,600 s. But see above.
            -->
            <label>digit</label>
            <item>one of the characters ‘X’, ‘0’, ‘1’, ‘2’, ‘3’, ‘4’, ‘5’, ‘6’, ‘7’, ‘8’, or ‘9’</item>
          </list>
          </p>
          <!-- p>The iXML rules herein make use of many — but not all — of
          the non-terminals defined in Norman Tovey-Walsh’s <ref
          target="https://github.com/invisibleXML/ixml/tree/master/samples/ISO-8601-2004">sample
          iXML grammar for ISO 8601:2004</ref> in addition to the
          following clauses.</p>
          <ab type="fdb">
            <code lang="ixml">-digit-possibly-unspecified = digit ; "X" .</code>
            <lb/> <!\-\- should not be needed; see Stylesheets #723 and remove when fixed. \-\->
            <code lang="ixml">-optional-minus-sign = '-'?.</code>
          </ab -->
        </div>
        <div type="section" xml:id="notcov">
          <head>Not covered</head>
          <p>In addition to those topics mentioned in <ptr
          target="#profile"/>, above, this document does not cover the
          temporal representations already permitted as values of the
          TEI <att>when</att> attribute in any further detail.<note
          place="foot">Except to point out that gMonth, gMonthDay, and
          gDay indicate recurrence, not one of a set. E.g.,
          <val>--08-24</val> means <q>every August 24th</q>, not
          <!-- 24 Aug is “independance day” in Ukraine -->
          <q>some August 24th, I do not know which</q>.</note> Those values are:
          <list>
            <item>date (<w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var>, e.g. <val>1945-10-17</val>)</item>
            <!-- “Show business kept us all alive
                 Since 17 October 1945                           # i.e. “loyalty day”, in which a crowd demanded release of Juan Peron
                 But the star has gone, the glamour’s worn thin
                 That’s a pretty bad state for a state to be in” -->
            <item>gYear (<w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var>, e.g. <val>1988</val>)</item>
            <!-- 1988 was a foundational year for TEI — Poughkeepsie and all that  -->
            <item>gMonth (<w:fix>--</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var>, e.g. <val>--03</val>; not part of ISO 8601:2019)</item>
            <!-- March is Women’s History month in the USA -->
            <item>gDay (<w:fix>---</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var>, e.g. <val>---13</val>; not part of ISO 8601:2019)</item>
            <!-- The Ides of Jan, Feb, Apr, Jun, Aug, Sep, Nov, & Dec are on the 13th. -->
            <item>gYearMonth (<w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var>, e.g. <val>1962-10</val>)</item>
            <!-- The Cuban Missle Crisis occured in October, 1962 -->
            <item>gMonthDay (<w:fix>--</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var>, e.g. <val>--04-01</val>; not part of ISO 8601:2019)</item>
            <!-- My favorite holiday. -->
            <!-- Alternate, or later use: 10-14 (between 21:30 and
                 22:00) is when Miss Emily French was murdered in
                 _Witness for the Prosecution_ -->
            <item>time (<w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var>, e.g. <val>15:10:00</val>)</item>
            <!-- The 3:10 to Yuma, although I have to admit I have not seen either the original 1957 film nor the 2007 remake. -->
            <item>dateTime
            (<w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var>, e.g. <val>1970-04-13T22:08:19-05:00</val>)</item>
            <!-- “Okay, Houston, we’ve had a problem here” (Swigert;
                 Lovell was ~25 s later), although
                 https://nssdc.gsfc.nasa.gov/planetary/lunar/ap13chrono.html
                 puts it one second later at 22:08:20-05. The actual
                 transcript (AS13_TEC.PDF, transcript page 160, PDF pg
                 167) says LMP (Fred Haise) said “Okay , Houston” at
                 :19, and CDR (Jim Lovell) said “I believe we’ve had a
                 problem here.” at :20; then CDR repeated “Houston,
                 we’ve had a problem. We’ve had a main B bus
                 undervolt.” at :35. -->
            <!-- Eva Peron died 1952-07-26T20:25-03:00 (I think) -->
          </list>
          Note that the example of <q>dateTime</q>, above, includes a
          time shift representation (aka a time zone); <q>time</q>
          could also have a time shift representation appended. A time
          shift representation is optional, and is either
          <w:fix>±</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var>,
          <w:fix>±</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var>,
          or <w:fix>Z</w:fix>.
          <!--
              It is not clear to me that ISO 8601 does or does not
              permit time shifts on date, gYear, gMonth, gDay,
              gYearMonth, or gMonthDay representations, but it is a
              moot point, as XML Schema Part 2 explicitly does allow
              them.
          -->
          </p>
          <div type="subsection" xml:id="not_other_cals">
            <head>other calendars</head>
            <p>ISO 8601 covers the Gregorian calendar, and can easily
            be used to cover proleptic Gregorian dates. It makes no
            attempt to address Hebrew, Julian, Mayan, <q>Old
            Style</q>, or other calendar systems.</p>
            <figure xml:id="datidxfig01">
              <egXML xml:id="datidhxmp01" xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples"
                        source="https://www.monticello.org/research-education/thomas-jefferson-encyclopedia/jeffersons-gravestone/">
                <ab style="text-transform: uppercase;">
                  Born <date when="1743-04-13">April 2 1743 O.S.</date>
                  <lb/>
                  Died <date when="1826-07-04">July 4 1826</date>
                </ab>           
              </egXML>
              <egXML xml:id="datidhxmp02" xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples"
                     source="https://www.al-habib.info/islamic-calendar/hijridateconverter.htm">
                <date calendar="#Hijri" when="2024-12-22">76 Jumadal Akhirah 242 AH</date>
              </egXML>
              <!-- Just the month: <span dir="rtl" lang="ar">جُمَادَىٰ ٱلْأُولَىٰ</span> -->
            </figure>
          </div>
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Implied &amp; explicit formats</head>
          <p>ISO 8601:2019 describes two major formats for expression
          of temporal information, the <soCalled>implied
          form</soCalled> (or <soCalled>implicit format</soCalled>)
          and the <soCalled>explicit form</soCalled>. All of the
          examples so far in this document (“2022-12-25”, 
          “15:10:00”, etc.) are in the implied form. In the implied
          form the unit of a component can be determined from its
          number of digits and the separator characters. In the
          explicit form the unit of a time scale component is
          indicated by a character that immediately follows the
          numeric value. E.g., <val>2022Y12M25D</val>,
          <val>0013D</val>, <val>T15H10M0S</val>, etc.</p>
          <p>Because these two forms are quite different, they are
          initially addressed in separate chapters.</p>
          <p>In either format, there are never any spaces in a
          temporal representation. Yes, it is common to see a usage
          like <q>She was born <emph
          style="font-weight:bold;">2024-11-27 04:01</emph> at Exeter
          Hospital</q>. But this is an example of a complete ISO 8601 
          date followed by a space followed by an ISO 8601 time
          (without the <mentioned>T</mentioned> time designator and
          with reduced precision to the minute), not an ISO 8601 date
          &amp; time.</p>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div type="chapter">
        <head>Implied formats</head>
        <p>In the implied formats, the characters
        <mentioned>-</mentioned>, <mentioned>+</mentioned>,
        <mentioned>:</mentioned>, <mentioned>T</mentioned>, and
        <mentioned>W</mentioned> are used to separate the various
        timescale components from one another. These characters, along
        with the strict length of each component, allow for
        unambiguous expression of dates and times.</p>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Common form dates &amp; times, dates, and times</head>
          <p>A date or date and time may be represented using a
          combination of the year, month, day, hour, minute, and
          second with a variety of precisions.
          <list>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ssⓓs̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mmⓓm̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hhⓓh̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DDⓓD̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MMⓓM̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYYⓓȲ</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var></item>
          </list>
          </p>
          <p>Similarly a time alone may be represented using a variety
          of methods with a variety of precisions.
          <list>
            <item><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ssⓓs̄</w:var> (the leading <mentioned>T</mentioned> is optional)</item>
            <item><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var> (the leading <mentioned>T</mentioned> is optional)</item>
            <item><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mmⓓm̄</w:var> (the leading <mentioned>T</mentioned> is optional)</item>
            <item><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var> (the leading <mentioned>T</mentioned> is optional)</item>
            <item><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hhⓓh̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var></item>
          </list>
          Note that a time expression (in any of the above implied
          formats, whether a date is included or not) — that is, an
          expression that includes either a <q>T</q> or a <q>:</q> —
          may be followed (without a space) by a time shift
          representation of <w:fix>±</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var>,
          <w:fix>±</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var>,
          or <w:fix>Z</w:fix>. A time shift representation of <q>Z</q>
          is the same as a time shift representation of <q>+00</q> or
          <q>+00:00</q>. (And, in case you are curious, time shift
          representations of <q>-00</q> and <q>-00:00</q> do not
          exist, but would be the same if they did.)</p> 
          <p>Further note that any of the above expressions for date,
          time, or date &amp; time (whether a complete representation
          or one with reduced precision, e.g. only a decade or only
          hours &amp; minutes) can be considered a duration rather
          than a date or time. That is, we can think of
          <val>15:10</val> as <q>10 minutes past three in the
          afternoon</q> or as <q>an interval of time lasting 15 hours
          plus 10 minutes</q>. Keep in mind, though, that a time shift
          indicatation cannot be appended to a representation of
          duration. (An interval of 15 hours and 10 minutes lasts 910
          minutes whether you are in Victoria, BC or A Coruña,
          Spain<!-- Hometowns of MDH & HBS, respectively -->.)</p>
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Ordinal dates</head>
          <p>A date may instead be represented by a year and the
          ordinal day number within the year. The year is (as usual)
          expressed as a 4-digit number; the ordinal day is expressed
          as a 3-digit number (1–366, where 366 is only used for leap
          years); and the two are separated by a hyphen.  For example,
          Valentine’s Day this year was <val>2024-045</val>; it is on
          the 45th day of every year.  May Day, on the other hand, was
          <val>2024-122</val> this year, but was on
          <val>2023-121</val> last year and will be on
          <val>2025-121</val> again next year, because 2024 is a leap
          year.</p>
          <p>An ordinal date may also be combined with a time. Thus
          the following formats may be used to express an ordinal
          date, each of which could have a time shift indication
          appended.
          <list>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>OOO</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ssⓓs̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>OOO</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>OOO</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mmⓓm̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>OOO</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>OOO</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hhⓓh̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>OOO</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>OOOⓓD̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>OOO</w:var></item>
          </list></p>
          <p>Although it is feasible to think of <q>6543-210</q> as a
          period of 6,543 years plus 210 days, ISO 8601:2019 does not
          permit using ordinal dates as durations. (Instead you would
          have to use something like <q>0210.574948665</q>,
          <q>0210-06.9</q>, or <q>0210-06-27.375</q>, or the explicit
          format (<q>6543Y210D</q>)).</p>
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Week dates</head>
          <p>A date may also be represented by its week within a given
          year, and the day within that week. For purposes of counting
          weeks for this representation, the first week of a year is
          the first week containing a Thursday.</p>
          <p>In this representation, the year is (as usual) expressed
          as a 4-digit number; the week is expressed as a 2-digit
          number (01–53) immediately preceded by a <w:fix>W</w:fix>;
          and the day within the week is expressed by a 1-digit number
          (1–7, where <val>1</val> is Monday and <val>7</val> is
          Sunday). For example, Edie Brickell and Paul Simon <q>first
          laid eyes on each other</q> on <val>1988-W44-6</val>.
          <!-- per https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Edie_Brickell#Personal_life -->
          </p>
          <p>A week may be specified without a day of the week to
          indicate an entire week. And, as with ordinal dates and
          common dates, the time, possibly with a time shift, may be
          appended (with a <w:fix>T</w:fix> separating). Thus the
          following are possible forms using the week date.
          <list>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-W</w:fix><w:var>WW</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>D</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ssⓓs̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-W</w:fix><w:var>WW</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>D</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-W</w:fix><w:var>WW</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>D</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mmⓓm̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-W</w:fix><w:var>WW</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>D</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-W</w:fix><w:var>WW</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>D</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hhⓓh̄</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-W</w:fix><w:var>WW</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>D</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-W</w:fix><w:var>WW</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>D</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>⊖YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-W</w:fix><w:var>WW</w:var></item>
          </list>
          All but the last two might have a time shift representation
          of <w:fix>±</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var>,
          <w:fix>±</w:fix><w:var>hh</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var>,
          or <w:fix>Z</w:fix> appended. None but the last can
          represent a duration.</p>
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Supra-year specifications</head>
          <p>The three units of time longer than a year typically used
          in DH are the decade, the century, and the millennium. ISO
          8601, and thus this profile, provides no mechanism for
          directly indicating a millennium in an implicit form.
          <!-- Can it be represented in explicit form? At one point I
               thought so adn wrote “(A millinnium can be reprented in
               the explicit format, see <ptr
               target="#millennium"/>.)”, but I am not so sure at the
               moment. In any case, it can be represented with
               unspecified digits in the year or using a set. -->
          </p>
          <div type="subsection">
            <head>centuries</head>
            <p>A century is indicated by a 2-digit number that may be
            preceded by a minus sign; the two digits are the same as the
            first two digits for every year in that century.<note
            place="foot">There are two main systems for determining
            which years are part of each standard century. In the strict
            construction, the twentieth century comprises the years
            1901–2000, inclusive. In the popular model, it is 1900–1999,
            inclusive. (See the discussion in the <ref
            target="https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Century#Start_and_end_of_centuries">Wikipedia
            page</ref> for details.) ISO 8601:2019 uses the popular
            model.</note> Thus <val>20</val> is the 21st century (the
            years 2000 through 2099, inclusive), and <val>-01</val> is
            the 2nd century BCE (the years -0199 through -0100,
            inclusive).<note place="foot">Many dating systems instead
            consider the 2nd century BCE to be -0200 through -0101,
            inclusive.</note> For example:
            <figure xml:id="datidhfig03">
              <egXML xml:id="datidhxmp03" xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples"
                        source="https://genius.com/Monty-python-background-to-history-lyrics https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Uy0wpC6B3a0">
                ​<sp who="#jones">
                  ​<speaker>PROF. JONES:​</speaker>
                  ​<p>But of course there is considerable evidence of
                  open-field villages as far back as the ​<date
                  when-iso="09">tenth century​</date>.​</p>
                ​</sp>
              </egXML>
              <?dsg ICW?>
              <!-- That source page currently (2024-12-22) includes an
                   Apple Music audio snippet. This quote is from
                   ~00:14/~00:19 within that snippet. But I *strongly*
                   recommend just listening to the whole thing. Try
                   https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=16RZqXXfcjg. -->
            </figure>
            </p>
            <p>ISO 8601:2019, like an astronomer, refers to the year
            before the year 1 AD as year 0000, as opposed to year
            -0001. Thus although the centuries <val>00</val> and
            <val>-00</val> are not the same century, they do overlap:
            they each contain the year <val>0000</val>.</p>
            <!-- <ab type="fdb"> -->
            <!--   <code lang="regex">-?[0-9]{2}</code> -->
            <!--   <lb/> <!-\- should not be needed; see Stylesheets #723 and remove when fixed. -\-> -->
            <!--   <code lang="ixml">century = optional-minus-sign, digit, digit.</code> -->
            <!-- </ab> -->
          </div>
          <div type="subsection">
            <head>decades</head>
            <p>A decade is indicated by a 3-digit number that may be
            preceded by a minus sign; the three digits are the same as
            the first three digits for every year in that decade. Thus
            <val>192</val> is the 1920s (the years 1920 through 1929,
            inclusive, in contrast to the year 192 AD, which is
            <val>0192</val><!-- The year a fire at the Temple of Peace
            burned much or most of Galen’s works -->), and
            <val>-20</val> is the 2nd decade BCE (the years -0029
            through -0020, inclusive). For example:
            <figure xml:id="datidxfig04">
              <egXML xml:id="datidhxmp04" xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples"
                        source="http://www.chakoteya.net/movies/movie4.html https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pgHxFNFWlZc">
                ​<sp who="#admiral_kirk">
                  ​<speaker>KIRK:​</speaker>
                  ​<p>Him? He's harmless. Back in ​<date when-iso="196">the
                  sixties​</date> he was part of the Free Speech movement
                  at Berkeley. I think he had a little too much LDS.​</p>
                ​</sp>
              </egXML>
              <?dsg ICW?>
            </figure>
            </p>
            <p>Note that the decades <val>000</val> and <val>-000</val> are
            not the same decade, although they overlap: each
            contains the year <val>0000</val>.</p>
            <!-- <ab type="fdb"> -->
            <!--   <code lang="regex">-?[0-9]{3}</code> -->
            <!--   <lb/> <!-\- should not be needed; see Stylesheets #723 and remove when fixed. -\-> -->
            <!--   <code lang="ixml">decade = optional-minus-sign, digit, digit, digit.</code> -->
            <!-- </ab> -->
          </div>
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Unspecified digits</head>
          <p>Any number of the digits of an ungrouped timescale
          component may be expressed as an <w:fix>X</w:fix> to
          indicate it is unspecified. So, e.g., while <val>196</val>
          indicates the 1960s (an entire decade), <val>196X</val>
          indicates a single year within the 1960s, but does not
          specify which one. <code>XX:15</code> says a quarter past
          the hour, but does not specify past <emph>which</emph>
          hour.</p>
          <!-- <ab type="fdb"> -->
          <!--   <code lang="regex">([0-9]{2}|[0-9]{3}|-?[0-9X]{4}(-( [0X][1-9X] | 1[12X] )(-( [0][1-9X] | [12X][0-9X] | 3[01X] ))?)?|T( [01X][0-9X] | 2[0-3X] )(:( [0-5X][0-9X] )(:( [0-5X][0-9X] ))?)?( [-+] [0-5][0-9] (:[0-5][0-9])? | Z )?|( [01X][0-9X] | 2[0-3X] ):( [0-5X][0-9X] )(:( [0-5X][0-9X] ))?( [-+] [0-5][0-9] (:[0-5][0-9])? | Z )?|-?[0-9X]{4}-( [0X][1-9X] | 1[12X] )-( [0][1-9X] | [12X][0-9X] | 3[01X] )T( [01X][0-9X] | 2[0-3X] )(:( [0-5X][0-9X] )(:( [0-5X][0-9X] ))?)?( [-+] ( 14(:00)? | ([01][0123](:[0-5][0-9]) )? | Z )?)</code> -->
          <!--   <lb/> <!-\- should not be needed; see Stylesheets #723 and remove when fixed. -\-> -->
          <!--   <code lang="ixml"> -->
          <!--     -pud = -digit-possibly-unspecified . -->
          <!--     -date-pud = year-pud ; year-pud, '-', month-pud ; year-pud, '-', month-pud, '-', day-pud . -->
          <!--     -time-pud = hour-pud ; hour-pud, ':', minute-pud ; hour-pud, ':', minute-pud, ':', second-pud . -->
          <!--     -dateTime-pud = -date-pud, 'T', time-pud . -->
          <!--     -year-pud = pud, pud, pud, pud . -->
          <!--     -month-pud = pud, pud . -->
          <!--     -day-pud = pud, pud . -->
          <!--     -hour-pud = pud, pud . -->
          <!--     -minute-pud = pud, pud . -->
          <!--     -second-pud = pud, pud, ( fraction-sep, pud+ )? . -->
          <!--   <?syd FIXME! ?></code> -->
          <!-- </ab> -->
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Subsets of Year (other than month)</head>
          <p>A year is commonly divided into 12 months. But there are
          other divisions of a year we may wish to express. ISO
          8601-2:2019 provides for division of a year into seasons, 
          semesters, quadrimesters, or trimesters (quarters).</p>
          <list>
            <item><w:fix>21</w:fix> Spring (independent of location)</item>
            <item><w:fix>22</w:fix> Summer (independent of location)</item>
            <item><w:fix>23</w:fix> Autumn (independent of location)</item>
            <item><w:fix>24</w:fix> Winter (independent of location)</item>
            <item><w:fix>25</w:fix> Spring — Northern Hemisphere</item>
            <item><w:fix>26</w:fix> Summer — Northern Hemisphere</item>
            <item><w:fix>27</w:fix> Autumn — Northern Hemisphere</item>
            <item><w:fix>28</w:fix> Winter — Northern Hemisphere</item>
            <item><w:fix>29</w:fix> Spring — Southern Hemisphere</item>
            <item><w:fix>30</w:fix> Summer — Southern Hemisphere</item>
            <item><w:fix>31</w:fix> Autumn — Southern Hemisphere</item>
            <item><w:fix>32</w:fix> Winter — Southern Hemisphere</item>
            <item><w:fix>33</w:fix> Quarter 1 (3 months in duration)</item>
            <item><w:fix>34</w:fix> Quarter 2 (3 months in duration)</item>
            <item><w:fix>35</w:fix> Quarter 3 (3 months in duration)</item>
            <item><w:fix>36</w:fix> Quarter 4 (3 months in duration)</item>
            <item><w:fix>37</w:fix> Quadrimester 1 (4 months in duration)</item>
            <item><w:fix>38</w:fix> Quadrimester 2 (4 months in duration)</item>
            <item><w:fix>39</w:fix> Quadrimester 3 (4 months in duration)</item>
            <item><w:fix>40</w:fix> Semestral 1 (6 months in duration)</item>
            <item><w:fix>41</w:fix> Semestral 2 (6 months in duration)</item>
          </list>
          <figure  xml:id="datidhfig05">
            <egXML xml:id="datidhxmp05" xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples"
                   source="https://www.vqronline.org/essay/white-house-spokesman">
              ​<div type="article">
                ​<head>The White House Spokesman​</head>
                ​<byline>By ​<persName>Lindsay Rogers​</persName>​</byline>
                ​<dateline>ISSUE: ​<date when-iso="1926-26">Summer 1926​</date>​</dateline>
                ​<p>Not the least of the distinctions of the American plan
                of government is that it has tried new devices and made
                important contributions to democratic theory. The success
                of …​</p>
                ​<!-- ... -->
              ​</div>
            </egXML>
            <?dsg ICW?>
          </figure>
          <!--
              Negatives can be on the following implied format components:
              * YYYY (4.4.1.2)
              * YYY (4.4.1.7)
              * YY (4.4.1.8)
              (several not covered by this document)
          -->
          <!-- <p>The following may be used to validate and to parse into -->
          <!-- XML a date that uses this feature. Remember that in this -->
          <!-- profile, years are always 4 digits.</p> -->
          <!-- <ab type="fdb"> -->
          <!--   <code lang="regex">[~?%]?-?[0-9X]{4}[~?%]?-(2[1-9]|3[0-9]|4[01])</code> -->
          <!--   <lb/> <!-\- should not be needed; see Stylesheets #723 and remove when fixed. -\-> -->
          <!--   <code lang="ixml">subyear-grouped-date = year, -'-', subyear-group . -->
          <!--   subyear-group = 2["1"-"9"] ; 3["0"-"9"] ; 4["0";"1"] .</code> -->
          <!-- </ab> -->
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <!--
              8.3 that for which qualification is allowed (all are
                  allowed in both implied and explicit formats; all are
                  left qualifiable):
              * YYYY (year)
              * MM (month)
              * Wnn (ordinal week)
              * DD (day of month)
              * n (day-of-week)
              * OOO (ordinal day of yr)
              * HH (hour)
              * mm (minute)
              * ss (second)
              * YYY (decade)  # I do not understand why these can be left-qualified,
              * YY (century)  # since complete qualification (i.e. right-qualified)
                              # is preferred over individual qualification.
          -->
          <head>Qualification: uncertainty and approximation</head>
          <p>Using ISO 8601:2019 we can explicitly indicate components
          of temporal expressions (including the entire expression)
          which are considered <term>uncertain</term> (i.e., the
          source is unreliable) or <term>approximate</term> (i.e., an
          estimate that is possibly or even probably correct). The
          qualification character used to indicate uncertainty is
          <w:fix>?</w:fix>; the character used to indicate
          approximation is <w:fix>~</w:fix>; and to indicate both
          uncertainty and approximation is <w:fix>%</w:fix>.</p>
          <p>To apply a qualification character to a single time scale
          component (e.g., just the date, but not the year or month),
          place the qualification character immediately to the
          left of the component. E.g., the expression
          <val>1692-06-~16</val> indicates a date in June of 1692,
          which was probably, or at least possibly, the 16th.<!-- The
          date “Nathaniel Saltonstall, Esq., resigned from the [Special
          Court of Oyer and Terminer] …, presumably dissatisfied with
          the letter and that it had not outright barred the admission
          of spectral evidence. According to Upham, Saltonstall
          deserves the credit for "being the only public man of his
          day who had the sense or courage to condemn the proceedings,
          at the start."”, according to
          https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Salem_witch_trials --></p>
          <p>To apply a qualification character to a group of temporal
          expression components, including the entire expression,
          place the character to the right of the components it
          applies to or at the end of the expression (i.e., as the
          rightmost character of the expression). E.g. the expression
          <val>1869-10-02?</val> indicates an uncertain date of 02
          October 1869; the expression <val>1869-10?-02</val>
          indicates a date of 02 October 1869 for which the encoder
          asserts that the source is dubious with respect to the year
          and month, but reliable about the date (the 2nd of the
          month).<!-- The birthdate of Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi is
          not, however, uncertain. --></p>
          <p>To summarize, in implicit formats the qualification
          character (either <w:fix>?</w:fix>, <w:fix>~</w:fix>, or
          <w:fix>%</w:fix>) is placed either
          <list>
            <item>at the end of an entire temporal expression
            (in which case it applies to the entire expression);
            or</item>
            <item>immediately at the end of a subset of a temporal
            <!-- Should the following 3 be encoded as <q>, <mentioned>, or <w:fix>? -->
            expression, i.e., before a <q>-</q>, <q>T</q>, or <q>:</q>
            separator character (in which case it applies to the
            group of components to its left — note the above is just a
            special case of this); or</item>
            <item>immediately before the value of a particular
            component of a temporal expression, i.e., after a
            <!-- Should the following 3 be encoded as <q>, <mentioned>, or <w:fix>? -->
            <q>-</q>, <q>T</q>, or <q>:</q> separator character (in
            which case it applies to the single component to its
            right).</item>
          </list>
          </p>
          <p>It is possible to use more than one qualification character in
          a single expression, but two qualification characters should never
          occur immediately next to each other.</p>
          <p>While it is technically allowable to use the same
          qualification character more than once to apply to the same
          component, an expression that uses fewer qualification
          characters is preferred. E.g., although
          <val>0123?-01-23?</val> is <emph>allowed</emph>,
          <val>0123-01-23?</val> is preferred, as the
          <mentioned>?</mentioned> after the year adds no
          information.</p>
          <p>Keeping this in mind, and using the symbol
          <mentioned>ⓡ</mentioned> for a qualification character
          placed immediately to the right of a component (and thus
          applying to the entire portion of the expression that
          precedes it, i.e. is to its left), and the
          symbol <mentioned>ⓛ</mentioned> for a qualification
          character placed immediately to the left of a component (and
          thus applying only to the single component that immediately
          follows it, i.e. the single component to its right),
          <!-- Should the symbols ⓛ & ⓡ be swapped? -->
          <?CP says no, but perhaps a diagram would be worth a
               thousand words! Also using words “previous” and
               “following” instead of L & R in the prose might be helpful  ?>
          the following are possible formats for expression of a
          complete date &amp; time in the implied format with use of a
          single type of qualification (i.e., one of <w:fix>?</w:fix>,
          <w:fix>~</w:fix>, or <w:fix>%</w:fix>), but applied to any
          number of components (including none and all six, which are
          the first and last items in the list, respectively).
          <list>
            <!-- no qualifications (1): -->
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <!-- one component qualified (6): -->
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <!-- two components qualified (15): -->
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MMⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <!-- three components qualified (20): -->
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MMⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MMⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MMⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DDⓡ</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <!-- four components qualified (15): -->
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MMⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MMⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DDⓡ</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MMⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DDⓡ</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HHⓡ</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <!-- five components qualified (6): -->
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛMM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYYⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛDD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MMⓡ</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DDⓡ</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HHⓡ</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mmⓡ</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ss</w:var></item>
            <!-- all six components qualified (1): -->
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>MM</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>DD</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>HH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>mm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ssⓡ</w:var></item>
            <!-- week dates: 
            <item><w:var>YYYY</w:var><w:fix>-</w:fix><w:var>ⓛ</w:var><w:fix>W</w:fix><w:var>WW</w:var><w:fix>T</w:fix><w:var>ⓛHH</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛmm</w:var><w:fix>:</w:fix><w:var>ⓛss</w:var></item>
            -->
          </list>
          </p>
          <p>Qualification characters can (of course) be used in
          representations of dates (without time), times (without
          date), and reduced precision versions thereof, with or
          without a decimal fraction on the highest precision
          component. Furthermore it is possible to use two or three
          different qualification characters within a single
          expression. These possibilities are not covered by the above
          list. Qualification characters can also be used in ordinal
          dates (e.g., <val>1934?-016</val><!-- _The Night of January
          16th premiered (as _Woman on Trial_) in 1934 -->) or week
          dates (e.g., <val>2025-W04-~2</val>).<!-- Donald Trump plans
          to do a lot of damage to the USA on 2025-01-21 give or take
          a day --></p>
          <p>Note that ISO 8601:2019 does not seem to say whether a
          qualification character applied to a time or date &amp; time
          that has a time shift indicated is placed before the time
          shift representation or after. That is, it is inconclusiave
          as to whether <quote>around quarter to eight in the
          morning</quote> in Jerusalem should be represented with
          <val>07:45?+03</val> or with <val>07:45+03?</val>.
          <!-- Israel launched the 6-day war 1967-06-05T07:45+03 -->
          Logically the former seems more appropriate, as the
          uncertainty does not apply to the time zone; and there is no
          indication in ISO 8601:2019 that a qualification may be
          applied to a time shift. On the other hand, the only
          sentence that seems to apply says <quote>a qualification
          symbol occurring at the <emph>rightmost end</emph> of the
          expression</quote>. (Emphasis added.)</p>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div type="chapter"> 
        <head>Explicit Formats</head>
        <p>In the explicit form, each time scale component is
        expressed as a number followed by a letter that explicitly
        tells the reader (whether human or computer) what time
        component the number refers to. For example <val>1941Y8M15DT7H12M</val>,
        which may be more easily visualized as
        <w:var>1941</w:var><w:fix>Y</w:fix><w:var>8</w:var><w:fix>M</w:fix><w:var>15</w:var><w:fix>DT</w:fix><w:var>7</w:var><w:fix>H</w:fix><w:var>12</w:var><w:fix>M</w:fix>,
        is the same as <val>1941-08-15T07:12</val>.
        <!-- 1941-08-15T07:12 (time zone probably = Z) = Corporal Josef
         Jakobs is executed by firing squad for espionage, making him
         the last person to be executed at the Tower of London.
         —Wikipedia -->
        In the explicit formats there are no spaces or punctuation
        between the time scale components, which are always expressed
        in a particular order. Leading zeroes are not required. For
        example, in <val>2024Y1M26D</val> <!-- Australia Day this year
        -->the number of months is represented by <q>1M</q>, not
        <q>01M</q>.</p>
        <list>
          <head>The basic symbols used in explicit expressions, in order</head>
          <label><w:fix>P</w:fix></label> <item>optionally precedes the entire expression to indicate it is a duration (or <emph>p</emph>eriod)</item>
          <label><w:fix>Y</w:fix></label> <item>years</item>
          <label><w:fix>M</w:fix></label> <item>months</item>
          <label><w:fix>D</w:fix></label> <item>days</item>
          <label><w:fix>T</w:fix></label> <item>precedes the time components</item>
          <label><w:fix>H</w:fix></label> <item>hours</item>
          <label><w:fix>M</w:fix></label> <item>minutes</item>
          <label><w:fix>S</w:fix></label> <item>seconds</item>
          <label><w:fix>Z</w:fix></label> <item>precedes the time shift indication</item>
        </list>
        <p>As with the implicit format, a time, if present, is
        preceded by a <mentioned>T</mentioned>; unlike the implicit
        format, a component which has a zero value may be omitted. For
        example, <val>T30M</val> is the same as
        <val>0Y0M0DT0H30M0S</val>. (It is also the same as
        <val>T0.5H</val> except it asserts half past midnight precise
        to the minute, whereas <val>T0.5H</val> asserts half past
        midnight with precision only to the tenth of an hour, or six
        minutes).<!-- “Half-past twelve / And I’m watchin’ the late
        show in my flat, all alone / How I hate to spend the evening
        on my own” —ABBA, “Gimme! Gimme! Gimme!” --></p>
        <p>A time shift may be appended. It is preceded by a
        <mentioned>Z</mentioned> and expressed using an optional minus
        sign followed by an explicit time indication. (No time
        indication following the <mentioned>Z</mentioned> indicates
        the same time shift as <q>Z0H</q> or <q>Z0H0M</q>, i.e. UTC.)
        For example, <val>2019Y5M1DT23H59MZ2H</val>.<!-- Submissions
        for 2019 TEI conference in Graz were due -->
        <!-- Other possibilities: <val>2007Y12M27D</val>. Benazir
             Bhutto, ex-prime minister of Pakistan assassinated; “an
             unconscious Bhutto was taken to the Rawalpindi General
             Hospital at 17:35”. I am guessing that was hospital
             arrival time.
             <val>1970Y4M13D22H8M19SZ-5H</val> = Houston we’ve had problem -->
        </p>
        <div type="subsection">
          <head>Explicit week and ordinal dates</head>
          <p>To indicate a week date using the explicit format the
          week number is followed by the symbol <mentioned>K</mentioned>,
          for example <val>1988Y44K6D</val><!-- EB & PS on SNL, again -->.</p>
          <p>An ordinal date, i.e. the date expressed as the ordinal
          day number within the year rather than with a month and the
          day number within the month, is indicated in the explicit
          format by the symbol <mentioned>O</mentioned>. For example,
          <val>2024Y45O</val><!-- Valentine’s again -->.</p>
          <p>Week dates and ordinal dates in the explicit form may be
          qualified and may have a time shift appended.</p>
        </div>
        <div type="subsection">
          <head>Explicit century and decade</head>
          <p>In the explicit format a century is indicated with the
          symbol <mentioned>C</mentioned>, thus <val>18C</val> is the
          18th century and <val>-1C</val> represents the 2nd century
          BCE, i.e. the years -199–-100.</p>
          <p>Similarly, a decade is indicated with the symbol
          <mentioned>J</mentioned>, thus <val>192J</val> is the decade
          of the 1920s.</p>
          <p>Centuries and decades in the explicit form may be
          qualified. It is not clear whether ISO 8601:2019 permits
          a time shift with an explicit decade or century, but in
          any case this profile prohibits them.</p>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div type="chapter">
        <head>Intervals</head>
        <p>A time interval starts at one instant in time (which is
        necessarily described using a time component larger than an
        instant) and ends at another. Although we usually think of,
        use, and represent time intervals whose start time
        chronologically precedes their end time, ISO 8601:2019 allows
        expression of a negative duration, and thus an interval that
        goes backwards in time.</p>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Single interval</head>
          <p>A time interval is represented as one of
          <list>
            <item>a start point and an end point</item>
            <item>a start point and a duration</item>
            <item>a duration and an end point</item>
          </list>
          In all three cases, the two main components are separated by
          a slash (or solidus, U+002F). Start or end points may be
          represented using either the implicit or explicit form; a
          duration should be expressed in the explicit form with the
          preceding <q>P</q>.<note place="foot">It is not clear to me
          that this is a requirement of ISO 8601:2019, but since
          representing durations using the implicit form would be
          ambiguous &#x2026;</note> For example,
          <val>1994-04-07/1994-07-19</val> (which can be abbreviated
          to <val>1994-04-07/07-19</val>),
          <!-- Do we need an explanation of abbreviations here? -->
          <val>1994-04-07/P0Y3M13D</val>, and
          <val>P104D/1994-07-19</val> all represent the same
          interval.<!-- The genocide against the Tutsi in Rwanda
          --></p>
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Recurring intervals</head>
          <!-- National EMS week? -->
          <p>A recurring time interval is represented by a single time
          interval preceded by
          <w:fix>R</w:fix><w:var><emph>N</emph></w:var><w:fix>/</w:fix>,
          where <emph>N</emph> is a positive integer representing
          how many times the interval recurs<note place="foot">I
          suppose <q>0</q> is allowed, but would be kinda
          pointless.</note> or is absent, indicating that the interval
          repetition is unbounded. If the interval which is repeated
          starts with a date, time, or date &amp; time, it represents
          the start of the first interval; if the interval which is
          repeated starts with a duration, then the end date
          represents the end of the last interval. For example,
          <val>R/1987-03-01/P1M</val>.<!-- March is National Women’s
          History month in the USA; Congress first said so on
          1987-03-12, for 1987-03. --></p>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div type="chapter">
        <head>Sets: conjunctions and disjunctions</head>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Conjunction: multiple discrete dates</head>
          <p>It is sometimes useful to express that a single event
          took place over multiple, discrete dates or times. Often expressing
          these dates as a list of <gi>date</gi> (or <gi>time</gi>) elements makes
          sense, but occasionally it is more reasonable to record
          them as a single element.</p>
          <p>Take, for example, the entry for 1708-03-21<note
          place="foot">Which entry is labeled <quote>10</quote> for
          the 10th of March 1708, as it was written using
          <soCalled>old style</soCalled> dates.</note> from <title>The
          ladies diary: or, the womens almanack, for the year of our
          lord 1708</title>: <quote>Sun riſes and ſets at 6. Equal
          Days and Nights.</quote>. The author is relying on the
          ambiguity of the 12-hour clock to express two different
          times with the single character, <mentioned>6</mentioned>. Or
          consider an advertisement for the Los Angeles appearance of
          Taylor Swift during her <name>1989</name> tour:
          <quote>Appearing in Los Angeles, CA on the 22nd, 24th, 25th,
          and 26th of this August, 2015!</quote> <!-- Adapted from
          https://genius.com/Taylor-swift-1989-world-tour-dates-annotated
          --> Even if editors felt it appropriate to express tour
          dates using a range, in this case it would not work, because
          the range <val>2015-08-22..2015-08-26</val> (see the last
          paragraph of <ptr target="#ranges"/>) would incorrectly
          imply there was a performance on Sun 23 Aug 15. While other
          encodings are possible for these sorts of cases, ISO
          8601:2019 has a method for expressing exactly what is needed
          here: the conjunction of a set of (possibly disjoint) dates,
          times, or both.</p>
          <p>A set of comma-delimited expressions enclosed in curly
          braces (U+007B &amp; U+007D) means “all members of the set”. Thus:
          <figure xml:id="datidhfig06">
            <egXML xml:id="datidhxmp06" xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples" source="#WINITA_Ladies_Diary">
              Sun riſes and ſets at <time when-iso="{06:00,18:00}">6</time>. Equal Days and Nights.
            </egXML>
          </figure>
          And the expression for the Taylor Swift concert dates
          would be
          <code>{2015-08-22,2015-08-24,2015-08-25,2015-08-26}</code>.</p>
          <!-- <ab type="fdb"> -->
          <!--   <code lang="ixml"> -->
          <!--     set_conjunction = -"{", iso8601-datetime, ( -"," iso8601-datetime )+, -"}" -->
          <!--   </code> -->
          <!-- </ab> -->
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Disjunction: one of a set</head>
          <p>It is not at all uncommon to know some information
          about when something happened or to what date is being
          referred, but not enough to pin it down to one specific
          date. ISO 8601:2019 has a method for expressing exactly
          what is needed for this sort of case: the disjunction of a
          set of (possibly disjoint) dates, times, or both.</p>
          <p>A set of comma-delimited expressions enclosed in square
          brackets means “one member of the set”. So, for example, I
          know that my grandfather won a copy of the
          <title>Kelmscott Chaucer</title> at an auction in NYC
          sometime between late 1945 and early 1947, and furthermore
          it was sometime between November and February. Thus the
          expression
          <val>[1945-11,1945-12,1946-01,1946-02,1946-11,1946-12,1947-01,1947-02]</val>
          represents the various possibilities, precise to the
          month.<note place="foot">In truth I further know the
          auction occurred on a schoolday, not a weekend or
          holiday. But adding that extra precision would make the
          example <emph>very</emph> long, and pedagogically
          speaking, changes nothing.</note></p>
        </div>
        <div type="section">
          <head>Set notes</head>
          <p><label style="font-weight: bold;">Semantic
          note:</label> The order of expressions within a set is
          irrelevant. It is a lot easier for humans to proofread if
          the expressions are in some useful order (e.g.,
          chronologic), but the set has the same
          <emph>meaning</emph> no matter what the order.</p>
          <p><label style="font-weight: bold;">Syntactic
          note</label>: Whitespace may not be used to make the set
          more readable. Expressions are separated by a comma, not
          by a comma and a space. In fact, since the comma-separated
          expressions have no internal whitespace, there is no
          whitespace in the entire set.</p>
          <p><label style="font-weight: bold;">Underspecification
          note</label>: <!-- As far as I can tell, -->ISO 8601:2019
          does not say what it means if the same expression occurs
          more than once in a set. Nor does it address the ambiguity
          that arises if a comma is used as the decimal sign in one of
          the components in a set. (In any case, this profile does not
          permit a comma to be used as a decimal sign when inside a
          set.)</p>
          <p><label style="font-weight: bold;">Undercomprehension
          note</label>: I have yet to figure out if a set may be an
          element of a set. Although it is not explicitly
          demonstrated anywhere in the standard, this nesting
          capability would be a useful feature. E.g., taking
          advantage of both it and the double-dot notation discussed
          in the next chapter, we could express the dates that
          Professor Remus Lupin took wolfsbane potion mixed by
          Professor Severus Snape as
          <code>{1993-09-24..1993-09-30,1993-10-24..1993-10-30,1993-11-23..1993-11-29,1993-12-23..1993-12-28,1994-01-21..1994-01-27,1994-02-19..1994-02-25,1994-03-21..1994-03-27,1994-04-19..1994-04-25,1994-05-18..1994-05-24,[1994-06-17..1994-06-22,{1994-06-17..1994-06-21,1994-06-23}]}</code>.
          <!-- https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Muggles%27_Guide_to_Harry_Potter/Magic/Wolfsbane_Potion#Greater_Picture -->
          That is, he took the potion for 7 days prior to each full
          moon during the Hogwart’s 1993–1994 term, except before 
          the final full moon of the term he missed either the
          last or second-to-last dose.</p>
        </div>
      </div>
      <div type="chapter" xml:id="ranges">
        <head>Ranges</head>
        <p>It is often useful to express that something occurred
        sometime before a given date (or time), or sometime after a
        given date (or time), without being able to specify the
        actual date (or time) of occurrence. For example, we do not
        know when, exactly, the Doves Press began, but we do know it
        was before Emery Walker joined the business in 1900.
        <!-- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Doves_Press -->
        </p>
        <p>ISO 8601:2019 provides a mechanism precisely for cases
        such as these. A date or time expression preceded by a
        double dot (<w:fix>..</w:fix>, i.e., two U+002E
        characters in a row) means “on or before” the date or time
        expression. The entire double-dot expression indicates a
        single time or date of the same precision as the expression
        provided after the dots, either equivalent to it or some
        date or time prior to it. For example, <val>..2013-06</val>
        means “a calendar month that was before
        July of 2013”, <!-- i.e., before I started working at Northeastern -->
        whereas <val>..1914-06-28T11:30+01</val>
        means “some minute before 11:31 CET on 28 June 1914”.
        <!-- I.e., before the death of Archduke Franz Ferdinand -->
        <!-- https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Assassination_of_Archduke_Franz_Ferdinand -->
        <!-- Although it seems he was shot @ ~10:58 https://www.bbc.com/news/live/world-27978407 -->
        </p>
        <p>Similarly, a date or time expression followed by a double
        dot means “on or after” the date or time expression. So the
        sentence “Every day since we learned of global warming that
        we have done nothing is a day of shame.” might be encoded
        <figure xml:id="datidhfig07">
          <egXML xml:id="datidhxmp07" xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples" source="#NONE">
            <date when-iso="1988-06-24..">Every day since we learned
            of global warming</date> that we have done nothing is a
            day of shame.
          </egXML>
        </figure>
        </p> 
        <p>The “on or before” and the “on or after” representations
        can be combined as a shorthand for a conjunction set. For
        example, <code>2021-05..2022-01</code> represents the same set
        of calendar months as <code>{2021-05,2021-06,2021-07,2021-08,2021-09,2021-10,2021-11,2021-12,2022-01}</code>.
        <!-- The months for which Johns Hopkins University collected data to study vaccine hesitancy -->
        </p>
      </div>
    </body>
<!--     <back> -->
<!--       <div> -->
<!--         <head>An iXML grammar for ISO 8601:2004</head> -->
<!--         <p>This is a copy of the sample iXML grammar found in <ref -->
<!--         target="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/invisibleXML/ixml/refs/heads/master/samples/ISO-8601-2004/iso8601.ixml">the -->
<!--         ixml repository</ref> as of <date when="2024-12-24">Sun 24 Dec -->
<!--         24</date>. It is by Norman Tovey-Walsh, a member of the iXML -->
<!--         community group and primary author of the <ref -->
<!--         target="https://nineml.org/"><soCalled>coffee</soCalled> suite -->
<!--         of iXML tools</ref>.</p> -->
<!--         <!-\- This works as an <egXML> only because Norm happened not to use ‘<’ or ‘&’ -\-> -->
<!--         <figure xml:id="datidhfig08"> -->
<!--           <egXML xml:id="datidhxmp08" xmlns="http://www.tei-c.org/ns/Examples" -->
<!--                  source="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/invisibleXML/ixml/refs/heads/master/samples/ISO-8601-2004/iso8601.ixml"> -->
<!-- { An Invisible XML grammar for ISO 8601(:2004?) dates and times. } -->
<!-- { Originally constructed by Norm Tovey-Walsh, 17 April 2022      } -->
<!-- { See https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ISO_8601 among others        } -->

<!-- -iso8601-datetime = date -->
<!--                   ; time -->
<!--                   ; datetime -->
<!--                   ; duration -->
<!--                   ; interval -->
<!--                   ; recurrence . -->

<!-- date = calendar-date ; ordinal-date ; week-date . -->

<!-- -time = local-time ; utc-time . -->

<!-- -datetime = local-datetime ; utc-datetime . -->

<!-- local-datetime = -date, -'T', -local-time-no-t . -->
<!-- utc-datetime = -date, -'T', -utc-time-no-t . -->

<!-- duration = -standard-duration; -alternate-duration . -->

<!-- interval = start-end-interval -->
<!--          ; start-plus-duration-interval -->
<!--          ; duration-plus-end-interval . -->

<!-- recurrence = repeat-count, -'/', interval . -->

<!-- { -\- Calendar dates -\- } -->

<!-- -calendar-date = complete-calendar-date -->
<!--                  ; reduced-accuracy-calendar-date -->
<!--                  ; expanded-calendar-date . -->

<!-- -complete-calendar-date = year, month, day; year, -'-', month, -'-', day . -->

<!-- -reduced-accuracy-calendar-date = year, -'-', month; year; century . -->

<!-- -expanded-calendar-date = expanded-year, month, day -->
<!--                         ; expanded-year, -'-', month, -'-', day -->
<!--                         ; expanded-year, -'-', month -->
<!--                         ; expanded-year -->
<!--                         ; expanded-century . -->

<!-- { -\- Ordinal dates -\- } -->

<!-- -ordinal-date = complete-ordinal-date ; expanded-ordinal-date . -->

<!-- -complete-ordinal-date = year, day-of-year -->
<!--                        ; year, -'-', day-of-year . -->

<!-- -expanded-ordinal-date = expanded-year, day-of-year -->
<!--                        ; expanded-year, -'-', day-of-year . -->
                         
<!-- { -\- Week dates -\- } -->

<!-- -week-date = complete-week-date -->
<!--             ; reduced-accuracy-week-date -->
<!--             ; expanded-week-date . -->

<!-- -complete-week-date = year, -'W', week, day-of-week -->
<!--                     ; year, -'-W', week, -'-', day-of-week . -->

<!-- -reduced-accuracy-week-date = year, -'W', week -->
<!--                             ; year, -'-W', week . -->

<!-- -expanded-week-date = expanded-year, -'W', week, day-of-week -->
<!--                     ; expanded-year, -'-W', week, '-', day-of-week -->
<!--                     ; expanded-year, -'W', week -->
<!--                     ; expanded-year, -'-W', week . -->

<!-- { -\- Local time -\- } -->

<!-- local-time = local-time-t ; local-time-no-t . -->

<!-- -local-time-t = local-time-without-utc-t; local-time-with-utc-t . -->
<!-- -local-time-no-t = local-time-without-utc; local-time-with-utc . -->

<!-- -local-time-without-utc-t = -'T', local-time-without-utc . -->

<!-- -local-time-without-utc = hour, minute, second -->
<!--                         ; hour, -':', minute, -':', second -->
<!--                         ; hour, minute -->
<!--                         ; hour, -':', minute -->
<!--                         ; hour -->
<!--                         ; fractional-second-local-time -->
<!--                         ; fractional-minute-local-time -->
<!--                         ; fractional-hour-local-time . -->

<!-- -local-time-with-utc-t = -local-time-without-utc-t, utc-offset . -->
<!-- -local-time-with-utc = -local-time-without-utc, utc-offset . -->

<!-- -fractional-second-local-time = (hour, minute, second; hour, -':', minute, -':', second), -->
<!--                                 fraction-sep, -->
<!--                                 fractional-second . -->

<!-- -fractional-minute-local-time = (hour, minute; hour, -':', minute), -->
<!--                                 fraction-sep, -->
<!--                                 fractional-minute . -->

<!-- -fractional-hour-local-time = hour, fraction-sep, fractional-hour . -->

<!-- utc-offset = offset-hour, (-':'?, offset-minute)? . -->

<!-- { -\- UTC time -\- } -->

<!-- utc-time = utc-time-t ; utc-time-no-t . -->
<!-- -utc-time-t = -local-time-without-utc-t, -'Z' . -->
<!-- -utc-time-no-t = -local-time-without-utc, -'Z' . -->

<!-- { -\- Durations -\- } -->

<!-- -standard-duration = -'P', (standard-ymdhs-duration ; standard-week-duration) . -->

<!-- { N.B. This tecnically allows a standard-ymdhs-duration with no fields. } -->
<!-- -standard-ymdhs-duration = duration-years?, duration-months?, duration-days?, -->
<!--                            (-'T', duration-hours?, duration-minutes?, duration-seconds?)? . -->
<!-- -standard-week-duration  = duration-weeks . -->

<!-- -alternate-duration = -'P', (alternate-ymd-duration ; alternate-yd-duration) . -->

<!-- -alternate-ymd-duration = year, month, day, -'T', hour, minute, second -->
<!--                        ; year, -'-', month, -'-', day, -'T', hour, -':', minute, -':', second . -->
<!-- -alternate-yd-duration = year, number-of-days, -'T', hour, minute, second -->
<!--                       ; year, -'-', number-of-days, -'T', hour, -':', minute, -':', second . -->

<!-- -start-end-interval = (date; datetime), -'/', (date; datetime) . -->
<!-- -start-plus-duration-interval = (date; datetime), -'/', duration . -->
<!-- -duration-plus-end-interval = duration, -'/', (date; datetime) . -->

<!-- duration-years = digit+, -'Y' . -->
<!-- duration-months = digit+, -'M' . -->
<!-- duration-days = digit+, -'D' . -->
<!-- duration-hours = digit+, -'H' . -->
<!-- duration-minutes = digit+, -'M' . -->
<!-- duration-seconds = digit+, -'S' . -->
<!-- duration-weeks = digit+, -'W' . -->

<!-- { -\- Recurrence -\- } -->

<!-- -repeat-count = -'R-1' ; -'R' ; -'R', repetitions . -->
<!-- repetitions = digit+ . -->

<!-- { -\- Utility rules -\- } -->

<!-- expanded-year = sign, digit+, digit, digit, digit . -->
<!-- expanded-century = sign, digit+, digit, digit . -->
<!-- -sign = -'+' ; '-' . -->

<!-- offset-hour = @direction, digit, digit . -->
<!-- offset-minute = digit, digit . -->
<!-- direction = '+'; '-' . -->

<!-- year    = digit, digit, digit, digit . -->
<!-- century = digit, digit . -->
<!-- month   = digit, digit . -->
<!-- week    = digit, digit . -->
<!-- day     = digit, digit . -->
<!-- hour    = digit, digit . -->
<!-- minute  = digit, digit . -->
<!-- second  = digit, digit . -->
<!-- fractional-second = digit+ . -->
<!-- fractional-minute = digit+ . -->
<!-- fractional-hour = digit+ . -->

<!-- day-of-year = digit, digit, digit . -->
<!-- number-of-days = -day-of-year . -->
<!-- day-of-week = digit . -->

<!-- -digit = ["0"-"9"] . -->
<!-- -fraction-sep = -[','; '.'n] . -->
<!--           </egXML> -->
<!--         </figure> -->
<!--       </div> -->
<!--     </back> -->
  </text>
</TEI>
