TO PICKLE BUTTERNUTS.

These nuts are in the best state for pickling when the shell is soft,
and when they are so young that the outer skin can be penetrated by the
head of a pin. They should be gathered when the sun is hot upon them.

If you have a large quantity, the easiest way to prepare them for
pickling is to put them into a tub with sufficient lye to cover them,
and to stir and rub them about with a hickory broom, till they are
clean and smooth on the outside. This is much less trouble than
scraping them, and is not so likely to injure the nuts. Another method
is to scald them, and then to rub off the outer skin. Put the nuts into
strong salt and water for nine or ten days; changing the water every
other day, and keeping them closely covered from the air. Then drain
and wipe them, (piercing each nut through in several places with a
large needle,) and prepare the pickle as follows:â€”For a hundred large
nuts, take of black pepper and ginger root of each an ounce; and of
cloves, mace and nutmeg of each a half ounce. Pound all the spices to
powder, and mix them well together, adding two large spoonfuls of
mustard seed. Put the nuts into jars, (having first stuck each of them
through in several places with a large needle,) strewing the powdered
seasoning between every layer of nuts. Boil for five minutes a gallon
of the best white wine vinegar, and pour it boiling hot upon the nuts.
Secure the jars closely with corks and leathers. You may begin to eat
the nuts in a fortnight.

Walnuts may be pickled in the same manner.