TO PICKLE WALNUTS BLACK.

The walnuts should he gathered while young and soft, (so that you can
easily run a pin through them,) and when the sun is upon them. Rub them
with a coarse flannel or tow cloth to get off the fur of the outside.
Mix salt and water strong enough to bear an egg, and let them lie in it
nine days, (changing it every two days,) and stirring them, frequently.
Then take them out, drain them, spread them on large dishes, and expose
them to the air about ten minutes, which will cause them to blacken the
sooner. Scald them in boiling water, (but do not let them lie in it,)
and then rub them with a coarse woollen cloth, and pierce everyone
through in several places with a large needle, (that the pickle may
penetrate them thoroughly.) Put them into stone jars, and prepare the
spice and vinegar. To a hundred walnuts allow a gallon of vinegar, an
ounce of cloves, an ounce of allspice, an ounce of black pepper, half
an ounce of mace, and half an ounce of nutmeg. Boil the spice in the
vinegar for five or six minutes; then, strain the vinegar, and pour it
boiling hot over the walnuts. Tie up in a thin muslin rag, a tea-cupful
of mustard seed, and a large table-spoonful of scraped horseradish, and
put it into the jars with the walnuts. Cover them closely with corks
and leathers.

Another way of pickling walnuts black, is (after preparing them as
above) to put them into jars with the spices pounded and strewed among
them, and then to pour over them strong cold vinegar.