TO BOIL FRESH SALMON

Scale and clean the fish, handling it as little as possible, and
cutting it open no more than is absolutely necessary. Place it on the
strainer of a large fish-kettle and fill it up with cold water. Throw
in a handful of salt. Let it boil slowly. The length of time depends on
the size and weight of the fish. You may allow a quarter of an hour to
each pound; but experience alone can determine the exact time. It must
however be thoroughly done, as nothing is more disgusting than fish
that is under-cooked. You may try it with a fork. Skim it well or the
colour will be bad.

The minute it is completely boiled, lift up the strainer and rest it
across the top of the kettle, that the fish may drain, and then, if you
cannot send it to table immediately, cover it with a soft napkin or
flannel several folds double, to keep it firm by absorbing the
moisture.

Send it to table on a hot dish. Garnish with scraped horseradish and
curled parsley. Have ready a small tureen of lobster sauce to accompany
the salmon.

Take what is left of it after dinner, and put it into a deep dish with
a close cover. Having saved some of the water in which the fish was
boiled, take a quart of it, and season it with half an ounce of whole
pepper, and half an ounce of whole allspice, half a pint of the best
vinegar, and a tea-spoonful of salt. Boil it; and when cold, pour it
over the fish, and cover it closely again. In a cold place, and set on
ice, it will keep a day or two, and may be eaten at breakfast or
supper.

If much of the salmon has been left, you must proportion a larger
quantity of the pickle.

Boil salmon trout in a similar manner.