INDIAN LOAF CAKE.

Mix a tea-cup full of powdered white sugar with a quart of rich milk,
and cut up in the milk two ounces of butter, adding a salt-spoonful of
salt. Put this mixture into a covered pan or skillet, and set it on
coals till it is scalding hot. Then take it off, and scald with it as
much yellow Indian meal (previously sifted) as will make it of the
consistence of thick boiled mush. Beat the whole very hard for a
quarter of an hour, and then set it away to cool.

While it is cooling, beat three eggs very light, and stir them
gradually into the mixture when it is about as warm as new milk. Add a
tea-cup full of good strong yeast, and beat the whole another quarter
of an hourâ€”for much of the goodness of this cake depends on its being
long and well beaten. Then have ready a turban mould or earthen pan
with a pipe in the centre, (to diffuse the heat through the middle of
the cake.) The pan must be very well buttered, as Indian meal is apt to
stick. Put in the mixture, cover it, and set it in a warm place to
rise. It should be light in about four hours. Then bake it two hours in
a moderate oven. When done, turn it oat with the broad surface
downwards, and send it to table hot and whole. Cut it into slices, and
eat it with butter.

This will be found an excellent cake. If wanted for breakfast, mix it,
and set it to rise the night before. If properly made, standing all
night will not injure it. Like all Indian cakes, (of which this is one
of the best,) it should be eaten warm.

It will be much improved by adding to the mixture, a salt-spoon of
pearl-ash, or sal-aratus, dissolved in a little water.
