TO PRESERVE GINGER.

Take root of green ginger, and pare it neatly with a sharp knife,
throwing it into a pan of cold water as you pare it. Then boil it till
tender all through, changing the water three times. Each time put on
the ginger is quite cold water to lake out the excessive heat. When it
is perfectly tender, throw it again into a pan of cold water, and let
it lie an hour or more; this will make it crisp. In the mean time
prepare the syrup. For every six pounds of ginger root, clarify seven
pounds of the best double-refined loaf-sugar. Break up the sugar, put
it into a preserving kettle, and melt it in spring or pump water, (into
which you have stirred gradually the beaten white of two eggs,)
allowing a pint of water to each pound of sugar. Boil and skim it well.
Then let the syrup stand till it is cold; and having drained the
ginger, pour the syrup over it, cover it, and do not disturb it for two
days. Then, having poured it from the ginger, boil the syrup over
again. As soon as it is cold, pour it again on the ginger, and let it
stand at least three days. Afterwards boil the syrup again, and pour it
_hot_ over the ginger. Proceed in this manner till you find that the
syrup has thoroughly penetrated the ginger, (which you may ascertain by
its taste and appearance when you cut a piece off,) and till the syrup
becomes very thick and rich. Then put it all into jars, and cover it
closely.

If you put the syrup hot to the ginger at first, it will shrink and
shrivel. After the first time, you have only to boil and reboil the
syrup; as it is not probable that it will require any further
clarifying if carefully skimmed. It will be greatly improved by adding
some lemon-juice at the close of the last boiling.
