HASHED BEEF.

Take some roast beef that has been very much under-done, and having cut
off the fat and skin, put the trimmings with the bones broken up into a
stew-pan with two large onions sliced, a few sliced potatoes, and a
bunch of sweet herbs. Add about a pint of warm water, or broth if you
have it. This is to make the gravy. Cover it closely, and let it simmer
for about an hour. Then skim and strain it, carefully removing every
particle of fat.

Take another stew-pot, and melt in it a piece of butter, about the size
of a large walnut. When it has melted, shake in a spoonful of flour.
Stir it a few minutes, and then add to it the strained gravy. Let it
come to a boil, and then put to it a table-spoonful of catchup, and the
beef cut either in thin small slices or in mouthfuls. Let it simmer
from five to ten minutes, but do not allow it to boil, lest (having
been cooked already) it should become tasteless and insipid. Serve it
up in a deep dish with thin slices of toast cut into triangular or
pointed pieces, the crust omitted. Dip the toast in the gravy, and lay
the pieces in regular order round the sides of the dish.

You may hash mutton or veal in the same manner, adding sliced carrots,
turnips, potatoes, or any vegetables you please. Tomatas are an
improvement.

To hash cold meat is an economical way of using it; but there is little
or no nutriment in it after being twice cooked, and the natural flavour
is much impaired by the process.

Hashed meat would always be much better if the slices were cut from the
joint or large piece as soon as it leaves the table, and soaked in the
gravy till next day.