GOOSEBERRY WINE.

Allow three gallons of soft water (measured after it has boiled an
hour) to six gallons of gooseberries, which must be full ripe. Top and
tail the gooseberries; put them, a few at a time, into a wooden dish,
and with a rolling-pin or beetle break and mash every one; transferring
them, as they are done, into a large stone jar. Pour the boiling water
upon the mashed gooseberries; cover the jar, and let them stand twelve
hours. Then strain and measure the juice, and to each quart allow
three-quarters of a pound of loaf-sugar; mix it with the liquid, and
let it stand eight or nine hours to dissolve, stirring it several
times.

Then pour it into a keg of proper size for containing it, and let it
ferment at the bung-hole; filling it up as it works out with some of
the liquor reserved for that purpose. As soon as it ceases to hiss,
stop it close with a cloth wrapped round the bung. A pint of white
brandy for every gallon of the gooseberry wine may be added on bunging
it up. At the end of four or five months it will probably be fine
enough to bottle off. It is best to bottle it in cold frosty weather.
You may refine it by allowing to every gallon of wine the whites of two
eggs, beaten to a froth, with a very small tea-spoonful of salt. When
the white of egg, &c, is a stiff froth, take out a quart of the wine,
and mix them well together. Then pour it into the cask, and in a few
days it will be fine and clear. You may begin to use it any time after
it is bottled. Put two or three raisins in the bottom of each bottle.
They will tend to keep the wine from any farther fermentation.

Fine gooseberry wine has frequently passed for champagne. Keep the
bottles in saw-dust, lying on their sides.