ICING.

A quarter of a pound of finely powdered loaf-sugar, of the whitest and
best quality, is the usual allowance to one white of egg. For the cake
in the preceding receipt, three quarters of a pound of sugar and the
whites of three eggs will be about the proper quantity. Beat the white
of egg by itself till it stands alone. Have ready the powdered sugar,
and then beat it hard into the white of egg, till it becomes thick and
smooth; flavouring it as you proceed with a few drops of oil of lemon,
or a little extract of roses. Spread it evenly over the cake with a
broad knife or a feather; if you find it too thin, beat in a little
more powdered sugar. Cover with it thickly the top and sides of the
cake, taking care not to have it rough and streaky. To ice well
requires skill and practice. When the icing is about half dry, put on
the ornaments. You may flower it with coloured sugar-sand or nonparels;
but a newer and more elegant mode is to decorate it with, devices and
borders in white sugar; they can be procured at the confectioners, and
look extremely well on icing that has been tinted with pink by the
addition of a little cochineal.

You may colour icing of a pale or deep yellow, by rubbing the lumps of
loaf-sugar (before they are powdered) upon the outside of a large lemon
or orange. This will also flavour it finely.

Almond icing, for a very fine cake, is made by mixing gradually with
the white of egg and. sugar, some almonds, half bitter and half sweet,
that have been pounded in a mortar with rose water to a smooth paste.
The whole must be well incorporated, and spread over the cake near half
an inch thick. It must be set in a cool oven to dry, and then taken out
and covered with a smooth plain icing of sugar and white of egg.

Whatever icing is left, may be used to make maccaroons or kisses.