DOUGH NUTS.

Take two deep dishes, and sift three quarters of a pound of flour into
each. Make a hole in the centre of one of them, and pour in a wine
glass of the best brewerâ€™s yeast; mix the flour gradually into it,
wetting it with lukewarm milk; cover it, and set it by the fire to rise
for about two hours. This is setting a sponge. In the mean time, cut up
five ounces of butter into the other dish of flour, and rub it fine
with your hands; add half a pound of powdered sugar, a tea-spoonful of
powdered cinnamon, a grated nutmeg, a table-spoonful of rose water, and
a half pint of milk. Beat three eggs very light, and stir them hard
into the mixture. Then when, the sponge is perfectly light, add it to
the other ingredients, mixing them all thoroughly with a knife. Cover
it, and set it again by the fire for another hour. When, it is quite
light, flour your paste-board, turn out the lump of dough, and cut it
into thick diamond shaped cakes with a jagging iron. If you find the
dough so soft as to be unmanageable, mix in a little more flour; but
not else. Have ready a skillet of boiling lard; put the dough-nuts into
it, and fry them brown; and when cool grate loaf-sugar over them. They
should be eaten quite fresh, as next day they will be tough and heavy;
therefore it is best to make no more than you want for immediate use.
The New York Oley Koeks are dough-nuts with currants and raisins in
them.