MORAVIAN SUGAR CAKE.

Cut up a quarter of a pound of butter into a pint of rich milk, and
warm it till the butter becomes soft; then stir it about in the milk so
as to mix them well. Sift three quarters of a pound of flour (or a pint
and a half) into a deep pan, and making a hole in the middle of it,
stir in a large table-spoonful of the best brewerâ€™s yeast in which a
salt-spoonful of salt has been dissolved; and then thin it with the
milk and butter. Cover it, and set it near the fire to rise. If the
yeast is sufficiently strong, it will most probably be light in two
hours. When it is quite light, mix with the dough a well-beaten egg and
three quarters of a pound more of sifted flour; adding a table-spoonful
of powdered cinnamon, and stirring it very hard. Butter a deep square
baking pan, and put the mixture into it. Set it to rise again, as
before. Mix together five ounces or a large coffee-cup of fine brown
sugar; two ounces of butter; and two table-spoonfuls of powdered
cinnamon. When the dough is thoroughly light, make deep incisions all
over it, at equal distances, and fill them with the mixture of butter,
sugar and cinnamon; pressing it hard down into the bottom of the holes,
and closing the dough a little at the top to prevent the seasoning from
running out. Strew some sugar over the top of the cake; set it
immediately into the oven, and bake it from twenty minutes to half an
hour, or more, in a brisk oven, in proportion to its thickness. When
cool, cut it into squares. This is a very good plain cake; but do not
attempt it unless you have excellent yeast.