A CHARLOTTE RUSSE.

Boil in half a pint of milk a split vanilla bean, till all the flavour
is extracted. Then strain the milk, and when it is cold stir into it
the yolks of four beaten eggs, and a quarter of a pound of powdered
loaf-sugar.

Simmer this custard five minutes over hot coals, but do not let it come
to a boil. Then set it away to cool. Having boiled an ounce of the best
Russian isinglass in a pint of water till it is entirely dissolved and
the water reduced to one-half, strain it into the custard, stir it
hard, and set it aside to get quite cold.

Whip to a stiff froth a quart of rich cream, taking it off in spoonfuls
as you do it, and putting it to drain on an inverted sieve. When the
custard is quite cold, (but not yet set or congealing,) stir the whipt
cream gradually into it.

Take at circular mould of the shape of a drum, the sides being
straight. Cut to fit it two round slices from the top and bottom of an
almond sponge-cake; glaze them with white of egg, and lay one on at the
bottom of the mould, reserving the other for the top.

Having thus covered the bottom, line the sides of the mould with, more
of the sponge-cake, cut into long squares and glazed all over with
white of egg. They must be placed so as to stand up all roundâ€”each
wrapping a little over the other so as to leave not the smallest
vacancy between; and they must be cut exactly the height of the mould,
and trimmed evenly. Then fill up with the custard and cream when it is
just beginning to congeal; and cover the top with the other round slice
of cake.

Set the mould in a tub of pounded ice mixed with coarse salt; and let
it remain forty minutes, or near an hour. Then turn out the Charlotte
on a china dish. Have ready an icing, made in the usual manner of
beaten white of egg and powdered sugar, flavoured with essence of
lemon. Spread it smoothly over the top of the Charlotte, which when the
icing is dry will be ready, to serve. They are introduced at large
parties, and it is usual to have two or four of them.