JELLY CAKE.

Sift three quarters of a pound of flour. Stir to a cream a pound of
butter and a pound of powdered white sugar, and mix in half a tea-cup
of rose water, and a grated nutmeg, with a tea-spoonful of powdered
cinnamon. Beat ten eggs very light, and add them gradually to the
mixture, alternately with the flour; stirring the whole very hard. Put
your griddle into the oven of a stove; and when it is quite hot, grease
it with fresh butter tied in a clean rag, and set on it a tin
cake-ring, (about the size of a large dinner plate,) greased also. Dip
out two large table-spoonfuls and a half of the cake batter; put it
within the tin ring, and bake it about five minutes (or a little
longer) without turning it. When it is done, take it carefully off;
place it on a large dish to cool; wipe the griddle, grease it afresh,
and put on another cake. Proceed thus till all the batter is baked.
When the cakes are cool, spread every one thickly over with grape
jelly, peach marmalade, or any other sweetmeat that is smooth and
thick; currant jelly will be found too thin, and is liable to run off.
Lay the cakes smoothly one on another, (each having a layer of jelly or
marmalade between,) and either grate loaf-sugar over the top one, or
ice it smoothly; marking the icing with cross lines of coloured
sugar-sand, all the lines meeting at the centre so as to divide the
cake, when cut, into triangular or wedge-shaped slices. If you ice it,
add a few drops of essence of lemon to the icing.

Jelly cake should be eaten fresh. It is best the day it is baked.

You may bake small jelly cakes in muffin rings.
