TO PRESERVE GOOSEBERRIES.

The best way of preserving gooseberries is with jelly. They should be
full grown but green. Take six quarts of gooseberries, and select three
quarts of the largest and finest to preserve whole, reserving the
others for the jelly. Put the whole ones into a pan with sufficient
water to cover them, and simmer them slowly till they begin to be
tender; but do not keep them on the fire till they are likely to burst.
Take them out carefully with a perforated skimmer to drain the warm
water from them, and lay them directly in a pan of cold water. Put
those that you intend for the jelly into a stew-pan, allowing to each
quart of gooseberries half a pint of water. Boil them fast till they go
all to pieces, and stir and mash them with a spoon. Then put them into
a jelly-bag that has been first dipped in hot water, and squeeze
through it all the juice. Measure the juice, and to each pint allow a
pound and a half of loaf-sugar. Break up the sugar, and put it into a
preserving kettle; pour the juice over it, and let it stand to melt,
stirring it frequently. When it has all dissolved, set it over the
fire, put the gooseberries into it, and let them boil twenty minutes,
or till they are quite clear, and till the jelly is thick and congeals
in the spoon when you hold it in the air. If the gooseberries seem
likely to break, take them out carefully, and let the jelly boil by
itself till it is finished. When all is done, put up the gooseberries
and the jelly together in glass jars.

Strawberries, raspberries, grapes, currants or any small fruit may in a
similar manner be preserved in jelly.
