TO PICKLE OYSTERS FOR KEEPING.

For this purpose take none but the finest and largest oysters. After
they are opened, separate them from their liquor, and put them into a
bucket or a large pan, and pour boiling water upon them to take out the
slime. Stir them about in it, and then take them out, and rinse them
well in cold water. Then put them into a large kettle with fresh water,
barely enough to cover them, (mixing with it a table-spoonful of salt
to every hundred oysters,) and give them a boil up, just sufficient to
plump them. Take them, out, spread them on large dishes or on a clean
table, and cover them with a cloth. Take the liquor of the oysters, and
with every pint of it mix a quart of the best vinegar, a table-spoonful
of salt, a table-spoonful of whole cloves, the same of whole black
pepper, and a tea-spoonful of whole mace. Put the liquid over the fire
in a kettle, and when it boils throw in the oysters, and let them
remain in it five minutes. Then take the whole off the fire, stir it up
well, and let it stand to get quite cold. Afterwards (if you have a
large quantity) put it into a keg, which must first be well scalded, (a
new keg is best,) and fill it as full as it can hold. Do not put a
weight on the oysters to keep them down in the liquor, as it will crush
them to pieces if the keg should be moved or conveyed to a distance. If
you have not enough to fill a keg, put them into stone jars when they
are perfectly cold, and cover them securely.