TO BOIL POTATOES.

Potatoes that are boiled together, should be as nearly as possible of
the same size. Wash, but do not pare them. Put them into a pot with
water enough to cover them about an inch, and do not put on the pot
lid. When the water is very near boiling, pour it off, and replace it
with the same quantity of cold water, into which throw a good portion
of salt. The cold water sends the heat from the surface to the heart,
and makes the potatoes mealy. Potatoes of a moderate size will require
about half an hour boiling; large ones an hour. Try them with a fork.
When done, pour off the water, cover the pot with a folded napkin, or
flannel, and let them stand by the fire about a quarter of an hour to
dry.

Peel them and send them to table.

Potatoes should not be served up with the skins on. It has a coarse,
slovenly look, and disfigures the appearance of the dinner; besides the
trouble and inconvenience of peeling them at table.

When the skins crack in boiling, it is no proof that they are done, as
too much fire under the pot will cause the skins of some potatoes to
break while the inside is hard.

After March, when potatoes are old, it is best to pare them before
boiling and to cut out all the blemishes. It is then better to mash
them always before they are sent to table. Mash them when quite hot,
using a potato-beetle for the purpose; add to them a piece of fresh
butter, and a little salt, and, if convenient, some milk, which will
greatly improve them. You may score and brown them on the top.

A very nice way of serving up potatoes is, after they are peeled, to
pour over them some hot cream in which a very little butter has been
melted, and sprinkle them with pepper. This is frequently done in
country houses where cream is plenty. New potatoes (as they are called
when quite young) require no peeling, but should be well washed and
brushed before they are boiled.