MULLAGATAWNY SOUP, AS MADE IN INDIA.

Take a quarter of an ounce of China turmeric, the third of an ounce of
cassia, three drachms of black pepper, two drachms of cayenne pepper,
and an ounce of coriander seeds. These must all be pounded fine in a
mortar, and well mixed and sifted. They will make sufficient curry
powder for the following quantity of soup:

Take two large fowls, or three pounds of the lean of veal. Cut the
flesh entirely from the bones in small pieces, and put it into a
stew-pan with two quarts of water. Let it boil slowly for half an hour,
skimming it well. Prepare four large onions, minced and fried in two
ounces of butter. Add to them the curry powder and moisten the whole
with broth from the stew-pan, mixed with a little rice flour. When
thoroughly mixed, stir the seasoning into the soup, and simmer it till
it is as smooth and thick as cream, and till the chicken or veal is
perfectly tender. Then stir into it the juice of a lemon; and five
minutes after take up the soup, with the meat in it, and serve it in
the tureen.

Send to table separately, boiled rice on a hot-water dish to keep it
warm, The rice is to be put into the plates of soup by those who eat
it.

To boil rice for this soup in the East India fashion:â€”Pick and wash
half a pound in warm water. Put it into a sauce-pan. Pour two quarts of
boiling water over it, and cover the pan closely. Set it in a warm
place by the fire, to cook gradually in the hot water. In an hour pour
off all the water, and setting the pan on hot coals, stir up and toss
the rice with a fork, so as to separate the grains, and to dry without
hardening it. Do not use a spoon, as that will not loosen the grains
sufficiently.